THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
Vol. 272, No. 7, Issue of February 14, pp. 3883–3886, 1997
© 1997 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.
Printed in U.S.A.

Communication
The Dictyostelium Mitogenactivated Protein Kinase ERK2
Is Regulated by Ras and cAMPdependent Protein Kinase (PKA)
and Mediates PKA Function*
(Received for publication, December 5, 1996)
Laurence Aubry‡§¶, Mineko Maeda‡§i,
Robert Insall**, Peter N. Devreotes‡‡, and
Richard A. Firtel‡§§
From the ‡Department of Biology, Center for Molecular
Genetics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California 92093-0634, the ‡‡Department of Biological
Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, and the **MRC
Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University
College London, Gower Street,
London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom

The chemoattractant cAMP, acting through serpentine cAMP receptors, results in a rapid and transient
stimulation of the Dictyostelium mitogen-activated protein kinase ERK2 activity (1). In this study we show that
other pathways required for aggregation, including Ras
and cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), are important regulators of ERK2 activation and adaptation. By
examining both the level and kinetics of activation and
adaptation of ERK2, we show that Ras is a negative
regulator of ERK2. Activated Ras or disruption of a Ras
GAP gene results in reduced ERK2 activation whereas
disruption of putative Ras GEF or expression of dominant negative Ras proteins have a more rapid, higher,
and extended activation. CRAC, a PH domain-containing protein required for adenylyl cyclase activation, is
also required for proper ERK2 adaptation. PKA overexpression results in a more rapid, higher level of activation, whereas pka null cells show a lower level but more
extended ERK2 activation. Furthermore, we show that
constitutive expression of PKA catalytic subunit bypasses the requirement of ERK2 for aggregation and
later development, indicating that PKA lies downstream
from ERK2 and that ERK2 may regulate one or more
components of the signaling pathway required for mediating PKA function, possibly by directly regulating
PKA R or a protein controlling the intracellular level of
cAMP.

* This work was supported by United States Public Health Service
Grants GM28007 (to P. N. D.) and GM37830 (to R. A. F.). The costs of
publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement”
in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
§ These two authors contributed equally to this manuscript.
¶ Supported by Fondation pour la Recherche Medicale de France and
Human Frontiers Science Program fellowships.
i Supported in part Grant-in-aid for Scientific Research 06044234
from the Ministry of Education, Science, and Culture of Japan. Present
address: Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Osaka University,
Toyonaka, Osaka 560, Japan.
§§ To whom correspondence should be addressed: Center for Molecular Genetics, Rm. 225, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093-0634. Tel.: 619-534-2788; Fax: 619-5347073; E-mail: rafirtel@ucsd.edu.
This paper is available on line at http://www-jbc.stanford.edu/jbc/

This is an Open Access article under the CC BY license.

A cell’s ability to respond to an extracellular signal involves
both the activation of pathways and subsequent adaptation in
which the cells are no longer fully responsive to the extracellular signal. This allows the cells to properly regulate the level
and extent of the signaling pathway as well as adapt to changing environmental conditions. Well known examples are the
pheromone pathway in yeast and the mammalian cell b-adrenergic receptor (2, 3). In Dictyostelium, aggregation is mediated
by a periodic activation and adaptation of pathways regulated
by G protein-coupled cARs1 that bind extracellular cAMP as
the ligand (4 – 6). In response to extracellular cAMP, guanylyl
and adenylyl cyclase activities are rapidly stimulated and then
adapted. If cAMP levels are kept constant the cells remain
nonresponsive, whereas removal of the cAMP, which in vivo
occurs through its hydrolysis by an extracellular phosphodiesterase, allows the pathways to de-adapt within ;5 min.
MAP kinase cascades regulate a variety of intracellular responses through the activation of cell surface receptors (1, 2, 7).
During the preaggregation and aggregation stages of Dictyostelium development, the MAP kinase ERK2 is activated
through cAMP and folate chemotactic receptors (1).2 Stimulation with extracellular cAMP results in a .40-fold increase in
ERK2 activity that peaks at ;50 s and thereupon adapts,
reaching its basal level within 5– 8 min. ERK2 activation requires the G protein-coupled cAMP receptors that mediate
cAMP-stimulated adenylyl and guanylyl cyclase activation,
chemotaxis, and gene expression. cAMP-mediated activation of
ERK2 is partially independent of Ga2, the Ga subunit required
for cAMP stimulation of adenylyl and guanylyl cyclases, all
other identified Ga subunits, and the only known Gb subunit
(1). erk2 null cells are unable to aggregate due to a defect in
cAMP stimulation of adenylyl cyclase (8). Adenylyl cyclase
(ACA) and other signaling components known to be required
for the activation of adenylyl cyclase are found at normal levels
in erk2 null cells. ERK2 is also required for cell type differentiation and morphogenesis during the multicellular stages of
development as determined by the analysis of an ERK2 temperature-sensitive mutation (9).
Here we examine the regulation of ERK2 activation and
adaptation. Using mutants in the Ras pathway, including constitutively active and dominant negative Ras mutations, a Ras
GAP and a Ras GEF null mutation, we first show that Ras acts
as a negative regulator of ERK2 activity. Mutations in the
cytosolic regulator of adenylyl cyclase, CRAC, result in a loss of
proper ERK2 adaptation. Examination of cells in which the
cAMP-dependent protein kinase PKA catalytic subunit is disrupted or overexpressed indicates that PKA also plays an important role in these processes. Furthermore, we show that
overexpression of PKA in erk2 null cells bypasses the requirement of ERK2 for aggregation and that these cells form normal
fruiting bodies. Our results suggest complex pathways involving Ras, adenylyl cyclase and coupled components, and PKA
affecting the level and extent of ERK2 activation and that
ERK2 functions to control the level of activation of PKA by
1
The abbreviations used are: cAR, chemoattractant receptor; MAP,
mitogen-activated protein; ACA, adenylyl cyclase; CRAC, cytosolic regulator of adenylyl cyclase; PKA, cAMP-dependent protein kinase; GEF,
guanine exchange factor; MBP, myelin basic protein; GTPgS, guanosine
59-3-O-(thio)triphosphate.
2
M. Maeda and R. A. Firtel, unpublished observations.

3883

3884

Regulation of MAP Kinase in Dictyostelium

FIG. 1. Effect of Ras on cAMP-stimulated ERK2 activation. The
results show in-gel assays of cAMP stimulation of ERK2 activity. The
activation of ERK2 was measured in aggregation-competent cells (see
“Materials and Methods”). “Normalization” controls containing extracts
of a time course that allows an internal standardization of the results
between gels and between experiments were present in all gels described previously (1), but are not shown. The same amount of total
extract protein is loaded in each lane and in general between different
experiments. The levels of ERK2 were also examined by Western blot
and were not detectably different in any samples except erk2 null cells,
which showed no protein (data not shown). The band corresponding to
ERK2 (solid arrowhead) has been established previously. The 30-kDa
kinase is labeled with an open arrowhead in the wild-type strain. All
exogenous genes are expressed from integrating vectors except
Ras(D57Y) described in the legend to Fig. 2. aleA null-aimless null cells.

regulating the activation of adenylyl cyclase and other components in this pathway.
MATERIALS AND METHODS

“In Gel” Assays for ERK2 Activity—Activation of ERK2 was measured in cells competent to aggregate (aggregation-competent cells), the
stage at which the stimulation of adenylyl cyclase is maximal as described previously (1), using in gel assays to quantitate ERK2 activity.
Cells were pulsed for 4 h with 30 nM cAMP prior to harvesting, washing,
and then activation by cAMP. Samples are normalized for the amount
of protein. Because of the possibility that the level of renaturation and
activity may not be identical between gels, each gel contains four
normalization samples, which allow gels to be compared and quantitated internally. In addition, we quantited the amount of ERK2 protein
in samples using the anti-ERK2 antibody (1). The levels of ERK2 were
not detectably different in any samples except the ERK2 gene disruption (erk2 null cells) (data not shown).
Cell Transformation and Cell Culture—Dictyostelium cells were
transformed, grown vegetatively, and developed in suspension culture
as described previously (1).
RESULTS

Ras Is a Negative Regulator of ERK2—The putative Ras GEF
Aimless (AleA) is required for proper aggregation of Dictyostelium cells (10). aleA null cells show normal activation of guanylyl cyclase but have a significantly reduced level of adenylyl
cyclase activation in response to cAMP (10), as has been shown
for erk2 null cells (8). To determine whether Aimless, and by
implication a Ras protein, was involved in the regulation of
ERK2 activation, we examined the kinetics and level of activation of ERK2 in an aimless null strain using an in gel assay in
which an ERK2 substrate, myelin basic protein (MBP), is
added into the SDS gel. After size fractionation, the proteins
are denatured and renatured and then assayed for MBP-phosphorylating activity in the presence of [g-32P]ATP (Ref. 1; see
“Materials and Methods”). As shown in Fig. 1 and as described
previously (1), wild-type cells show a rapid activation of the
42-kDa ERK2 that peaks at ;50 s and then rapidly decreases
to basal levels within 5– 8 min. In aimless null cells, ERK2
shows a higher basal level of ERK2 activity and a more rapid,
higher, and more extended activation of ERK2 than that observed in wild-type cells. Exogenous expression of Aimless in

these cells, which complements the aggregation defect, also
complements the effects of the Aimless loss-of-function mutation on the kinetics and level of ERK2 activation (Fig. 2A).
To further investigate the possible role of Ras in regulating
the activity of ERK2, we examined the effect of overexpressing
dominant interfering or dominant active forms of the RasD
protein, one of five known Dictyostelium Ras proteins (see
“Discussion”), in stably transformed strains from the actin
(Act15) promoter, which is expressed throughout growth and
development. Expression of the dominant negative RasD(S17N) on an integrating vector, which gives a very high level
of expression, results in a more rapid and extended level of
activation of ERK2 than observed in wild-type cells (Fig. 1).
This is qualitatively similar to that observed in the aimless null
strain, except that the profile is even more extended, with a
dramatic effect on adaptation. These observations are
strengthened by experiments in which expression of
RasD(D57Y) protein (11) from an extrachromosomally replicating vector, which gives a lower level of expression, also results
in a more rapid and higher level of activation of ERK2 (Fig. 2B;
legend to Fig. 2). These results are similar to those of the
aimless null cells and suggest that Ras negatively regulates
ERK2 activity. As would be expected from this conclusion,
overexpressing the dominant active RasD(Q61L) results in a
substantially reduced and slightly delayed activation of ERK2
compared with wild-type cells (Fig. 1). Disruption of the gene
encoding a Ras GAP, which should result in an increase in the
level of RaszGTP in these cells (ddrasgap1 null cells) (12), also
yields a reduced activation of ERK2 when compared with wildtype cells (Fig. 2B), consistent with the effect of RasD(Q61L) on
ERK2 activation. These results suggest that the Ras signaling
pathway is a negative regulator of ERK2 MAP kinase activity
(see “Discussion”). Overexpression of RasD(Q61L) in the aimless null strain results in a suppression of the high level of
ERK2 activation in aimless null cells and a delay in the kinetics
of activation as observed in wild-type cells expressing
RasD(Q61L) (Fig. 1).
Components of the Adenylyl Cyclase/PKA Pathway Are Required for Activation and Adaptation of ERK2—Because ERK2
activity is required for cAMP receptor-mediated activation of
adenylyl cyclase, we examined components of the adenylyl
cyclase pathway for possible involvement in a regulatory role in
modulating ERK2 activity. The PH domain-containing protein
CRAC is required for the activation of adenylyl cyclase ACA
and is thought to interact with Gbg (which activates adenylyl
cyclase in Dictyostelium) and adenylyl cyclase (13, 14). In crac
null cells, the initial kinetics of ERK2 activation in response to
cAMP were more rapid than seen in wild-type cells and the
activity remained at an elevated level for .8 min, a time at
which the wild-type level of ERK2 activity had returned to the
basal level (Fig. 2, C and D). Complementation of the crac null
mutation with an Act15/CRAC expression vector restored the
ERK2 activation profile to that of wild-type cells (Fig. 2C).
Interestingly, in aca null cells, the kinetics of ERK2 activation
were indistinguishable from those observed for wild-type cells
(Fig. 2B), suggesting that the ability of cells to properly stimulate adenylyl cyclase activity is not essential for the normal
adaptation of ERK2 but that CRAC and/or a CRAC-associated
protein may be essential for the adaptation.
PKA is also known to be important in regulating different
aspects of aggregation. pka null cells (cells in which the PKA
catalytic subunit has been disrupted) (15) are aggregationdeficient due to an inability to relay cAMP (16 –19). Previous
analyses showed that pka null cells or cells expressing a dominant negative PKA regulatory subunit do not express the
required aggregation-stage adenylyl cyclase ACA (19, 20); how-

Regulation of MAP Kinase in Dictyostelium

3885

FIG. 2. Effect of Ras, PKA, and components of the adenylyl cyclase activation pathway on cAMP-stimulated ERK2 activation. A,
complementation of aleA null cells with an AleA expression vector. B, assay of wild-type, wild-type cells overexpressing the PKA catalytic subunit
(WT/PKAov), null mutants of the aggregation-stage adenylyl cyclase ACA (aca2 cells), aca2 cells overexpressing PKA (aca2/PKAov), RasD(D57Y)
cells, and DdRasGAP1 null cells (12). For the RasD(D57Y) transformants only, the gene was expressed from the Act15 promoter on an
extrachromosomal vector (see text) because obtaining transformants with Ras(D57Y) mutant of RasD on an integrating vector has been
problematic.2 C, assay of wild-type, crac null, complemented crac null, and pka null cells. The wild-type strain samples are those previously
reported (1). D, quantitation of ERK2 activity.

ever, expression of ACA in pka null cells, while restoring chemoattractant activation of adenylyl cyclase, does not restore
the ability of the cells to aggregate (19). To examine whether
aspects of the activation/adaptation pathway may require
PKA, cAMP stimulation of ERK2 activity was examined in pka
null cells. Both the kinetics and level of stimulation were similar to those found in crac null cells (Fig. 2, C and D). The
maximum level of activation was consistently slightly lower
than that of wild-type cells, and the adaptation of the activity
was suppressed with the activity being high for more than 8
min. In addition, the basal level of ERK2 activity in unstimulated pka null cells was higher than that in wild-type cells (Fig.
2C). In pka null:ACA cells, the kinetics of activation and adaptation of ERK2 are similar to those in pka null cells (data not
shown), indicating that ACA, which is not expressed in pka null
cells (19), was not the limiting factor in these cells for maximal
ERK2 activation. The reduced level of ERK2 activation observed in aca null cells (Fig. 2B), is possibly due to the absence
of endogenous cAMP that would be expected to result in a
reduction in the level of active endogenous PKA. Because the
lack of PKA activity altered ERK2 activation and adaptation,
we examined the effect of overexpressing PKA in wild-type cells
from the Act15 promoter, which results in a high level of
constitutive PKA activity (21). As shown in Fig. 2B, these cells
exhibit a more rapid increase, a higher maximum level of
activation, and a more extended period of activation compared
with wild-type cells. This stimulation is independent of ACA, as
this pattern is observed in aca null cells expressing PKA (Fig.
2C).
Constitutive PKA Bypasses the Requirement of ERK2 for
Aggregation—When plated for development, erk2 null cells are
aggregation-deficient and are unable, even in response to exogenous cAMP, to proceed through development (8, 9). However, the erk2 null cells overexpressing the PKA catalytic subunit aggregate and produce fruiting bodies with wild-type
morphology (data not shown), indicating that these cells are
able to bypass the requirement of ERK2 for aggregation (see
“Discussion”).
DISCUSSION

The pathways required for the activation of adenylyl cyclase
in Dictyostelium are significantly more complex than the textbook paradigm. The direct activation in vivo in response to
cAMP stimulation or in vitro in the presence of GTPgS requires
the Gbg subunit and CRAC (13, 14, 22). In vivo stimulation
also requires ERK2 and the putative Ras GEF (8, 10). The

kinetics of ERK2 activation/adaptation are similar to those of
adenylyl cyclase, suggesting a model in which ERK2 activity is
required at the time of adenylyl cyclase stimulation (1). In
contrast to the situation in metazoans where MAP kinase pathways can be stimulated by Ras (23), our results suggest that
Ras is a negative regulator of chemoattractant receptor-mediated ERK2 activation. ERK2 activation is delayed and the level
significantly reduced in cells overexpressing RasD(Q61L),
whereas activation is enhanced in aimless null cells and cells
overexpressing RasD(S17N) or RasD(D57Y). Moreover, reduced ERK2 activation is also observed in a Ras GAP null
strain, and the elevated ERK2 activation in aimless null cells is
suppressed by RasD(Q61L). At present, we cannot reconcile the
effects of Ras pathway mutants on ERK2 activation with those
on adenylyl cyclase activation. The effects of the RasD(S17N)
are more severe than those in aimless null cells, yet aimless
null cells have a broader range of phenotypes than the
RasD(S17N) overexpression cells: RasD(S17N)-expressing cells
aggregate, whereas aimless cells do not and overexpression of
RasD(Q61L) does not complement the aggregation defect of
aimless cells. We expect, therefore, that one or more Ras proteins must positively regulate other pathways required for
aggregation and that differences in Ras protein function account for different effects on chemotaxis and adenylyl cyclase
activation, both required for aggregation. Indeed, cells overexpressing an activated RasG do not aggregate or activate adenylyl cyclase (24).
RasD is only one of five known Dictyostelium Ras genes
(25–27), some of which, including RasD, are essentially identical to mammalian Ras proteins within the highly conserved
N-terminal domain, whereas others show nonconserved amino
acid substitutions in this region, including the effector domain.
Our results on the effect of Ras on ERK2 activation are in direct
conflict with those of Knetsch et al. (11), who show that cells
expressing the dominant active RasD(G12T) have a high basal
level of ERK2 and that activity decreases with cAMP stimulation but also only show a ,5-fold cAMP-stimulated ERK2 activation. We cannot account for this discrepancy but emphasize
that our results are internally consistent with the analysis
being performed on multiple mutants affecting Ras function. It
is possible that the Knetsch group examined a different kinase;
we have confirmed that we are examining ERK2 using a purified, in vivo activated His-tagged ERK2.3
3

M. Maeda, L. Aubry, and R. A. Firtel, manuscript in preparation.

3886

Regulation of MAP Kinase in Dictyostelium

FIG. 3. Model for regulation of cAMP stimulation of ERK2. See
“Discussion” for details. CRAC and the heterotrimeric G protein containing Ga2 are required in vivo for cAMP stimulation of adenylyl
cyclase (AC). ERK2 is presumed to be activated through a classic MAP
kinase cascade as is indicated by the MAP kinase kinase (MEK) and the
MEK kinase (MEKK) in the pathway. ERK2 is required for cAMPstimulated activation of adenylyl cyclase. CRAC is required for the
proper adaptation of ERK2, and PKA activity is required for maximal
stimulation and normal adaptation. Overexpression of the PKA catalytic subunit results in a higher cAMP-stimulated ERK2 activity, suggesting that PKA is a positive regulator of ERK2 activation. Ras is a
negative regulator of ERK2 activation. The data presented in this
manuscript suggest that the Aimless Ras GEF regulates Ras activity
during aggregation. What activates Ras GEF is unknown. ERK2 may
mediate downstream responses by modulating PKA function, as constitutive PKA suppresses the erk2 null mutation.

The activation and adaptation pathways also involve CRAC.
However, this requirement is not dependent on the ability to
synthesize cAMP or activate cAMP-dependent protein kinase.
When CRAC translocates to the plasma membrane after cAMP
stimulation it may interact with upstream components of the
ERK2 MAP kinase pathway to down-regulate ERK2 activation.
Our results also present evidence for a role of PKA in regulating ERK2 activity. pka null cells have a higher basal activity
and a lower level, but more extended time, of activation. Overexpression of PKA yields a more rapid, extended, and higher
level of activation, suggesting that PKA may be essential for
maintaining low basal levels and maximally stimulating ERK2
activation. The more extended activation in pka null cells may
be associated with other roles of PKA, which is known to be
required for multiple aspects of aggregation and later multicellular development (19, 28).
Lastly, we showed that cells overexpressing the PKA catalytic subunit, which has been shown to lead to constitutive PKA
activity (21), suppresses the erk2 null phenotype. This suggests
that ERK2 is upstream from PKA and functions in part to

control the activation of PKA, which is required for aggregation. In wild-type cells, cAMP produced through the activation
of adenylyl cyclase would activate PKA. We expect that a
component of this pathway may be a direct substrate for ERK2.
ERK2 might function to directly regulate the PKA catalytic or
regulatory subunit to mediate the interaction of these subunits
or another protein that may control the level of cAMP in cells or
other aspects of the pathway. As constitutive PKA activity
suppresses the erk2 null phenotype, we expect that such a
protein would lie downstream from ERK2 and upstream of
PKA. A model depicting the possible inter-relationships between different components in the ERK2 pathway is shown in
Fig. 3. Further analyses should continue to elucidate the mechanisms controlling chemoattractant receptor-mediated signaling during aggregation.
REFERENCES
1. Maeda, M., Aubry, L., Insall, R., Gaskins, C., Devreotes, P. N., and Firtel, R.
A. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. 271, 3351–3354
2. Levin, D. E., and Errede, B. (1995) Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 7, 197–202
3. Premont, R. T., Inglese, J., and Lefkowitz, R. J. (1995) FASEB J. 9, 175–182
4. Firtel, R. A. (1995) Genes & Dev. 9, 1427–1444
5. Devreotes, P. N. (1994) Neuron 12, 235–241
6. Van Haastert, P. J. (1995) Experientia 51, 1144 –1154
7. Marshall, C. J. (1995) Cell 80, 179 –185
8. Segall, J., Kuspa, A., Shaulsky, G., Ecke, M., Maeda, M., Gaskins, C., Firtel,
R., and Loomis, W. (1995) J. Cell Bio. 128, 405– 413
9. Gaskins, C., Clark, A. M., Aubry, L., Segall, J. E., and Firtel, R. A. (1996) Genes
& Dev. 10, 118 –128
10. Insall, R., Borleis, J., and Devreotes, P. N. (1996) Curr. Biol. 6, 719 –729
11. Knetsch, M. L. W., Epskamp, S. J. P., Schenk, m. P. W., Wang, Y., Segall, J. E.,
and Snaar-Jagalska, B. W. (1996) EMBO J. 15, 3361–3368
12. Lee, S., Escalante, R., and Firtel, R. A. (1996) Development, in press
13. Insall, R., Kuspa, A., Lilly, P., Shaulsky, G., Levin, L., Loomis, W., and
Devreotes, P. (1994) J. Cell Biol. 126, 1537–1545
14. Lilly, P. J., and Devreotes, P. N. (1994) J . Biol. Chem. 269, 14123–14129
15. Mann, S. K. O., and Firtel, R. A. (1991) Mech. Dev. 35, 89 –102
16. Simon, M. N., Driscoll, D., Mutzel, R., Part, D., Williams, J., and Veron, M.
(1989) EMBO J. 8, 2039 –2044
17. Harwood, A. J., Hopper, N. A., Simon, M. N., Bouzid, S., Veron, M., and
Williams, J. G. (1992) Dev. Biol. 149, 90 –99
18. Firtel, R. A., and Chapman, A. L. (1990) Genes & Dev. 4, 18 –28
19. Mann, S. K. O., Brown, J. M., Briscoe, C., Parent, C., Pitt, G., Devreotes, P. N.,
and Firtel, R. A. (1997) Dev. Biol., in press
20. Schulkes, C., and Schaap, P. (1995) FEBS Lett. 368, 381–384
21. Mann, S. K. O., Yonemoto, W. M., Taylor, S. S., and Firtel, R. A. (1992) Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 89, 10701–10705
22. Lilly, P., Wu, L. J., Welker, D. L., and Devreotes, P. N. (1993) Genes & Dev. 7,
986 –995
23. Marshall, M. S. (1995) FASEB J. 9, 1311–1318
24. Khosla, M., Spiegelman, G. B., and Weeks, G. (1996) Mol. Cell. Biol. 16,
4156 – 4162
25. Reymond, C. D., Gomer, R. H., Mehdy, M. C., and Firtel, R. A. (1984) Cell 39,
141–148
26. Daniel, J., Bush, J., Cardelli, J., Spiegelman, G. B., and Weeks, G. (1994)
Oncogene 9, 501–508
27. Pawson, T., Amiel, T., Hinze, E., Auersperg, N., Neave, N., Sobolewski, A., and
Weeks, G. (1985) Mol. Cell. Biol. 5, 33–39
28. Pitt, G. S., Brandt, R., Lin, K. C., Devreotes, P. N., and Schaap, P. (1993) Genes
& Dev. 7, 2172–2180

