Current Biology, Vol. 15, 134–139, January 26, 2005, ©2005 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved.

DOI 10.1016/j .c ub . 20 05 . 01 .0 0 7

The PI3K-Mediated Activation of CRAC
Independently Regulates Adenylyl Cyclase
Activation and Chemotaxis
Frank I. Comer,1,2 Christopher K. Lippincott,1
Joseph J. Masbad,1 and Carole A. Parent1,*
1
Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology
Center for Cancer Research
National Cancer Institute
2
PRAT (Pharmacology Research Associate
Training) Research Fellowship Program
National Institute of General Medical Sciences
National Institutes of Health
Bethesda, Maryland 20892

Summary
The ability of a cell to detect an external chemical
signal and initiate a program of directed migration
along a gradient comprises the fundamental process
called chemotaxis [1]. Investigations in Dictyostelium
discoideum and neutrophils have established that
pleckstrin homology (PH) domain-containing proteins
that bind to the PI3K products PI(3,4)P2 and PI(3,4,5)P3,
such as CRAC (cytosolic regulator of adenylyl cyclase)
and Akt/PKB, translocate specifically to the leading
edge of chemotaxing cells [2–4]. CRAC is essential for
the chemoattractant-mediated activation of the adenylyl cyclase ACA [5], which converts ATP into cAMP,
the primary chemoattractant for D. discoideum. The
mechanisms by which CRAC activates ACA remain to
be determined. We now show that in addition to its
essential role in the activation of ACA, CRAC is involved in regulating chemotaxis. Through mutagenesis, we show that these two functions are independently regulated downstream of PI3K. A CRAC mutant
that has lost the capacity to bind PI3K products does
not support chemotaxis and shows minimal ACA activation. Finally, overexpression of CRAC and various
CRAC mutants show strong effects on ACA activation
with little effect on chemotaxis. These findings establish that chemoattractant-mediated activation of PI3K
is important for the CRAC-dependent regulation of
both chemotaxis and adenylyl cyclase activation.
Results and Discussion
CRAC Regulates Chemotaxis
To assess whether CRAC (cytosolic regulator of adenylyl
cyclase) is required for chemotaxis, cells lacking CRAC
(crac⫺) [5] were starved and allowed to differentiate to
the chemotaxis competent stage [2], as judged by Western blot analysis of early developmental markers, such
as the chemoattractant receptor cAR1 (Figure S1 in the
Supplemental Data available with this article online). The
chemotactic behavior of a large population of cells was
measured by the under-agarose chemotaxis assay. We
observed that, in contrast to wild-type Ax3 cells, crac⫺
cells do not move toward the chemoattractant source,
*Correspondence: parentc@helix.nih.gov

even after extended exposure to the chemoattractant
(Figure 1A). To characterize this behavior at the cellular
level, we visualized how cells respond to a point source
of chemoattractant that is delivered with a micropipette.
Here, again, we found that crac⫺ cells show reduced
chemotaxis. Within minutes after being exposed to the
gradient, wild-type Ax3 cells rapidly align and migrate
to the tip of the micropipette. Cells lacking CRAC, on
the other hand, show much slower movement, barely
moving one cell length during the 12 min recording,
compared to ⬎4 cell length for wild-type cells (Figure
1B, Movies 1 and 2, and Figure S2 for DIAS analysis).
Although the crac⫺ cells do eventually polarize and orient toward the tip of the micropipette, they display a
broad front and do not form streams of cells aligned in
a head-to-tail fashion, compared to wild-type cells.
To investigate whether the chemotaxis defect of the
crac⫺ cells is due to a fundamental defect in the mobilization of actin, we measured chemoattractant-dependent actin polymerization. We observed that, like wildtype cells, crac⫺ cells show a rapid peak of cortical
F-actin accumulation (within 5 s) upon stimulation (Figure 1C), demonstrating that crac⫺ cells can mobilize
the actin cytoskeleton in a chemoattractant-dependent
manner. Indeed, in agreement with previous work showing that crac⫺ cells exhibit normal orientation when
placed in a chemoattractant gradient, we also find that
crac⫺ cells are able to polarize in response to chemoattractant stimulation [6] (Figure 1B and Movie 2). Interestingly, when we measure the extent by which chemoattractants can polymerize actin as a function of time, we
find that crac⫺ cells do not display the second phase of
actin polymerization at approximately 120 s poststimulation, which has been proposed to play a role in pseudopod extension and chemotaxis (Figure 1D) [7]. Taken
together, these findings show that the chemotaxis defects of crac⫺ cells are not due to alterations in the
motility machinery but, instead, to defects in translating
the external chemoattractant gradient into directed
pseudopod extension and subsequent directed migration. Furthermore, these results establish that, similar
to RasC, AleA (a RasGEF), and the cytosolic regulator
Pianissimo, CRAC has at least two functions [8–11].
Namely, in addition to its established role in adenylyl
cyclase activation, CRAC is also involved in regulating
chemotaxis.

CRAC Regulates Adenylyl Cyclase
and Chemotaxis Independently
In order to begin to understand the mechanisms by
which CRAC regulates the activation of both adenylyl
cyclase and chemotaxis, we generated and characterized a series of C-terminal deletion mutants (⌬C-CRAC,
Figure 2A), including the synag7 deletion mutant, which
was previously isolated from a chemical mutagenesis
screen and shown to be defective in adenylyl cyclase
activation [12]. The various CRAC mutants were fused
to either HA (at the N terminus) or GFP (at the C terminus)

CRAC Regulates Adenylyl Cyclase and Chemotaxis
135

Figure 1. CRAC Regulates Chemotaxis
(A) Under-agarose chemotaxis assay. Differentiated wild-type Ax3 and crac⫺ cells were plated into wells on either side of a well containing
1 ␮M cAMP. Images were taken with a Leica DM IL stereoscope 45 min after the cells were plated. Chemotaxing cells exit from the well and
migrate under the agarose, appearing as a halo outside the perimeter of the well. Data are representative of results obtained from at least 6
independent experiments, each performed in triplicate.
(B) Chemotaxis to a point source of chemoattractant. Images of differentiated wild-type Ax3 (top panels and Movie 1) and crac⫺ cells (bottom
panels and Movie 2) migrating to a micropipette filled with 10 ␮M cAMP are shown. We could not measure any significant movement from
the crac⫺ cells in the presence of 1 ␮M cAMP, although wild-type cells responded very well to this concentration. Images representative of
at least five independent experiments are shown.
(C and D) Actin polymerization response in response to chemoattractant stimulation. (C) Differentiated cells were plated onto 8-well chambered
coverslips, stimulated with 10 ␮M cAMP, fixed at the indicated time points, and then F-actin was visualized by Texas-Red-X phalloidin.
Montages of two representative cells presented for each time point. (D) Differentiated cells were stimulated with 10 ␮M cAMP and, at the
indicated time points, aliquots were removed and fixed in potassium phosphate-PIPES buffer containing TRITC-phalloidin. Labeled actin was
extracted with MeOH and fluorescence intensity was measured in a spectrofluorimeter. SEM values are presented from four independent
experiments.

and expressed in crac⫺ cells. The resulting cell lines
were allowed to differentiate and were processed through
a battery of biological and biochemical analyses. We
found that, like crac⫺ cells, all of the ⌬C-CRAC mutants
fail to aggregate when plated on non-nutrient agar (data
not shown) and are defective in chemoattractant-mediated activation of adenylyl cyclase (Figure 2B). Nevertheless, the ⌬C-CRAC mutants can translocate to the
plasma membrane when stimulated with a uniform, saturating dose of chemoattractant, as judged by fluorescence microscopy and Western blot analysis of membrane preparations (Figure 2C). In addition, all of the
⌬C-CRAC mutants are capable of rescuing the crac⫺
chemotaxis defect, as judged by both the micropipette
and the under-agarose assays (Figure 2D). Cells that
lack adenylyl cyclase can chemotax but cannot relay
the chemoattractant signal to distal cells. As a result,
they do not organize in head to tail fashion in long
streams of cells during chemotaxis [13, 14]. Likewise,
the ⌬C-CRAC mutant-expressing cells, which are defective in the capacity to activate adenylyl cyclase, do not
stream during chemotaxis (Figure 2D and Movie 3). From
these studies, we conclude that the determinants under-

lying CRAC’s role during chemotaxis are distinct from
those involved in regulating adenylyl cyclase activation.
PI3K Products Regulate Chemotaxis and Adenylyl
Cyclase Activation
The PH (pleckstrin homology) domain of CRAC can bind,
in vitro, to the 3-phosphoinositides PI(3,4,5)P3 and
PI(3,4)P2, the lipid products of PI3K [15]. We thus characterized a series of CRAC PH domain constructs in order
to assess the role of PI3K in chemoattractant-mediated
CRAC signaling. Here again the various PH mutants
were fused to GFP to allow microscopic characterization
of the translocation. We found that, similar to other PH
domains [1], the CRAC PH domain alone (PHCRAC) expressed in crac⫺ cells is sufficient to mediate membrane
targeting upon either a uniform, saturating dose of chemoattractant or in a gradient of chemoattractant supplied by a micropipette (Figure S3). In spite of its proper
localization in response to chemoattractant, PHCRAC does
not rescue the chemotaxis defect of crac⫺ cells (Figure
S3) and crac⫺ cells expressing PHCRAC have no detectable adenylyl cyclase activation following chemoattractant stimulation (data not shown). These results demon-

Current Biology
136

Figure 2. CRAC Regulates Adenylyl Cyclase and Chemotaxis Independently
(A) Schematic representation of CRAC C-terminal deletion (⌬C-CRAC) mutants.
(B) ⌬C-CRAC mutants do not activate adenylyl cyclase. Adenylyl cyclase activity was measured after the addition of 10 ␮M cAMP in crac⫺
cells expressing either wild-type CRAC or ⌬C-CRAC mutants. Data are representative of results from three to four independent experiments,
each performed in duplicate.
(C) ⌬C-CRAC mutants translocate to the plasma membrane upon chemoattractant stimulation. In the top panels, differentiated cells were
stimulated with 10 ␮M cAMP and visualized microscopically, either live or after fixation 5 s poststimulation. For the biochemical translocation
assay (bottom panel), cells were stimulated with cAMP and, at the indicated time points, aliquots were removed, diluted with cold buffer, and
the membrane fractions were collected by centrifugation. Membrane fractions were analyzed by immunoblotting with either anti-GFP or antiHA antibodies, depending on the construct. Results shown are for the synag7 deletion mutant and are representative of all of the ⌬C-CRAC
mutants tested.
(D) ⌬C-CRAC mutants can support chemotaxis. Chemotaxis of crac⫺ cells expressing ⌬C-CRAC mutants was assessed by both the micropipette
assay (top panel and Movie 3) and the under-agarose assay (bottom panel) as described in the legend of Figure 1. The ⌬C-CRAC mutants
show chemotaxis in both assays but do not organize in a head-to-tail fashion in long streams as wild-type cells do. Results shown are for
the synag7 deletion mutant and are representative of all of the ⌬C-CRAC mutants tested.

strate that, although the PH domain is responsible for
CRAC’s recruitment to the plasma membrane, it does
not contain the information required to mediate chemotaxis or to activate adenylyl cyclase on its own. Moreover, because we observed normal translocation kinetics, these findings show that the regulation of the PI3K/
PTEN signaling cascade is intact in crac⫺ cells.
To further test the role of the PH domain in CRAC
function, we generated a mutant with a deletion of the
entire PH domain (⌬PH-CRAC) and expressed it in crac⫺
cells. We were unable to detect chemoattractant-mediated recruitment of ⌬PH-CRAC to the plasma membrane
(Figure S4), further confirming that the PH domain alone
is a primary determinant of CRAC recruitment to the
plasma membrane. Similarly, ⌬PH-CRAC did not rescue
either the chemotaxis defect (Figure S4) or the adenylyl
cyclase defect of crac⫺ cells (Figure 3C). These results
show that the PH domain of CRAC is essential for all of
its known chemoattractant-stimulated functions, namely,
membrane recruitment, chemotaxis, and adenylyl cyclase activation.

To examine more specifically the role of 3-phosphoinositides in CRAC function, we introduced a point mutation into the predicted 3-phosphoinositide binding motif
[16] within the CRAC PH domain (R42C-CRAC). We demonstrate that this point mutant fails to bind to 3-phosphoinositides in vitro (Figure 3A). As with ⌬PH-CRAC,
we were unable to detect cAMP stimulated translocation
of R42C-CRAC to the plasma membrane, either by fluorescence microscopy or Western blot analysis of membrane fractions (Figure 3B). In addition, the R42C-CRAC
point mutant failed to support chemotaxis in either the
micropipette assay (Figure 3B and Movie 4) or the underagarose assay (Figure 3B), even after extended exposure to the chemoattractant gradient. This finding demonstrates that 3-phosphoinositide binding is essential
for CRAC-mediated regulation of chemotaxis. Interestingly, we also find that the R42C-CRAC point mutant
only partially rescues the adenylyl cyclase defects of
crac⫺ cells (Figure 3C), suggesting that 3-phosphoinositide binding is important for CRAC-mediated activation
of adenylyl cyclase. These findings have two implica-

CRAC Regulates Adenylyl Cyclase and Chemotaxis
137

Figure 3. PI3K Products Regulate Chemotaxis and Adenylyl Cyclase Activation
(A) Dot blot assays for phosphoinositide binding. Supernatants of crac⫺ cells expressing GFP fusions of either wild-type CRAC (left panel) or
R42C-CRAC (right panel) were incubated with dot blots containing a variety of lipids, as indicated in the key to the right. Both supernatants
expressed comparable levels of protein, as judged by Western analysis. Bound proteins were detected with anti-GFP antibody.
(B) Chemotaxis and translocation of R42C-CRAC/crac⫺ cells. The R42C-CRAC mutant fails to support chemotaxis in either the micropipette
assay (top panels and Movie 4) or the under agarose assay (bottom panel). In the micropipette assay, the micropipette (indicated by the
arrow) was not moved for the duration of the 13 min video. Note the lack of translocation of the R42C-CRAC to the side of the cell facing the
chemoattractant source. The under-agarose assay was carried out for extended times (2 hr) to verify the chemotaxis defective phenotype of
R42C-CRAC. With this extended duration, wild-type cells form very long streams of cells migrating toward the chemoattractant source. For
the biochemical translocation assay (middle panel), cells were stimulated with 10 ␮M cAMP and membrane preparations analyzed as described
in the legend of Figure 2. The results are representative of at least three independent experiments.
(C) Adenylyl cyclase activity in CRAC PH domain mutants. Differentiated cells were stimulated with cAMP and processed for adenylyl cyclase
activity measurements as described in the legend of Figure 2. The graph is representative of at least six independent experiments, each
performed in duplicate.
(D) Myr-CRAC is degraded upon the initiation of differentiation. Images show the distribution and presence of Myr-CRAC-GFP expressed in
crac⫺ cells at different times after the initiation of differentiation. A larger field is presented for the 120 min time showing a larger number of
cells, indicating a widespread loss of Myr-CRAC-GFP (phase image on right). The bottom panel shows Western blot detection of Myr-CRACGFP at various time points after the start of differentiation.

tions. First, they establish that PI3K activity is required
for maximal chemoattractant-mediated stimulation of
adenylyl cyclase, as observed for relaxin-mediated adenylyl cyclase activation in a monocyte cell line [17]. Second, our findings show that the CRAC determinants that
independently regulate chemotaxis and adenylyl cyclase activation are downstream of PI3K.
In order to further assess the requirements for the
membrane recruitment of CRAC for adenylyl cyclase
activation, we fused CRAC to the src myristoylation
(Myr) sequence, which has previously been used for
targeting proteins to the plasma membrane [18]. This
Myr-CRAC fusion protein showed constitutive membrane localization in undifferentiated cells. Remarkably,
we found that the Myr-CRAC protein is rapidly internal-

ized and degraded upon the initiation of differentiation
(Figure 3D), therefore precluding us from assessing the
effects of constitutive membrane targeting of CRAC in
chemotaxis-competent cells. Nevertheless, these results raise the interesting possibility that the recruitment
of CRAC to the plasma membrane initiates a program
of regulated CRAC turnover.
Overexpression of CRAC and CRAC Mutants
Alters Chemoattractant Signaling
We reasoned that, because CRAC is important for multiple aspects of chemoattractant signaling, the overexpression of CRAC in wild-type Ax3 cells could also affect
a variety of signaling pathways. We found that the overexpression of wild-type CRAC dramatically increases

Current Biology
138

Figure 4. Overexpression of CRAC and CRAC Mutants Alters Chemoattractant Signaling to Adenylyl Cyclase
(A) Adenylyl cyclase activity in wild-type Ax3 cells expressing wild-type CRAC. To allow us to visually monitor the expression of our constructs,
we used GFP fusions for these experiments. We overexpressed CRAC in wild-type cells, selecting for transformants at G418 concentrations
of 5, 20, and 40 ␮g/ml. Cells were assayed for chemoattractant-stimulated adenylyl cyclase activation as described in the legend of Figure
2. The inset shows an anti-GFP Western blot demonstrating the relative expression level of CRAC-GFP at each dose of G418.
(B) Under-agarose chemotaxis assays of wild-type cells expressing CRAC and CRAC PH mutant constructs. These transformants were
generated using 40 ␮g/ml G418. In each case, the untransfected wild-type cells are in the top well and the transfected cells are in the bottom
well. Each experiment was performed at least three times in triplicate.
(C) Adenylyl cyclase activity in wild-type cells expressing the indicated CRAC constructs. Cells were assayed for chemoattractant-stimulated
adenylyl cyclase activation as described in the legend of Figure 2. The inset shows an anti-GFP Western blot demonstrating the relative
expression level of each construct.

the extent of adenylyl cyclase activation in response to
chemoattractant (Figure 4A). Interestingly, we also find
that CRAC overexpression does not have an apparent
effect on chemotaxis (Figure 4B). We conclude that
CRAC or a CRAC-interacting factor is limiting for adenylyl cyclase activation but not for chemotaxis. These
results are consistent with our previously reported studies showing that ACA is not required for chemotaxis [14].
To further characterize the CRAC PH domain, we overexpressed various PH domain mutants in wild-type Ax3
cells and analyzed CRAC-dependent processes. Like
wild-type CRAC, none of the overexpressed PH-domain
mutants has a dramatic effect on chemotaxis, although
cells expressing ⌬PH-CRAC routinely display less robust movement and PHCRAC expressed in wild-type cells
have polarity defects (Figure 4B and data not shown).
On the other hand, overexpression of some PH domain
mutants leads to interesting effects on chemoattractantmediated activation of adenylyl cyclase. While the overexpression of the PH domain alone has no major conse-

quence (data not shown), the overexpression of the
R42C-CRAC has a dominant positive effect (Figure 4C)
and the ⌬PH-CRAC mutant produced the opposite effect, showing a dominant negative suppression of adenylyl cyclase activation (Figure 4C). From these results,
we infer that adenylyl cyclase regulation requires the
interaction of multiple factors with both the C-terminal
region and the N-terminal PH domain, independent of
the 3-phosphoinositide binding site. As shown for a variety of other PH domain-containing proteins, these observations also imply that, in addition to binding to lipid
products of PI3K, the PH domain takes part in other
interactions that are critical for CRAC function [19]. We
propose that the dominant positive effect of overexpressed R42C-CRAC involves its binding to multiple factors that target and activate the adenylyl cyclase signaling complex. In contrast, the dominant negative effect
of overexpressed ⌬PH-CRAC involves its binding and
sequestration or inactivation of essential factors that
interact with the C-terminal region. We suggest that the

CRAC Regulates Adenylyl Cyclase and Chemotaxis
139

translocation of the CRAC complex initiates a series of
events that ultimately lead to the full activation of ACA.
In support of this hypothesis, we show here that R42CCRAC, which fails to bind to 3-phosphoinositides and
displays no measurable plasma membrane association,
confers minimal ACA activation when expressed in
crac⫺ cells. In addition, pten⫺ cells, which show an exaggerated and prolonged duration of CRAC translocation,
display sharply increased chemoattractant-dependent
activation of ACA [20]. Taken together, these results
suggest that CRAC is a central regulator that mediates
the action of multiple effectors of chemoattractant signaling.
Supplemental Data
Supplemental Data including Experimental Procedures, four additional figures, and four movies are available at http://www.currentbiology.com/cgi/content/full/15/2/134/DC1/.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Drs. Pierre Coulombe, Alan Kimmel, and Joe
Brzostowski for reading the manuscript and making many insightful
suggestions. We also thank members of the Parent laboratory for
reviewing the manuscript and for helpful discussions.
Received: August 10, 2004
Revised: October 13, 2004
Accepted: November 8, 2004
Published: January 26, 2005
References
1. Parent, C.A. (2004). Making all the right moves: chemotaxis in
neutrophils and Dictyostelium. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 16, 4–13.
2. Parent, C.A., Blacklock, B.J., Froehlich, W.M., Murphy, D.B.,
and Devreotes, P.N. (1998). G protein signaling events are activated at the leading edge of chemotactic cells. Cell 95, 81–91.
3. Meili, R., Ellsworth, C., Lee, S., Reddy, T.B., Ma, H., and Firtel,
R.A. (1999). Chemoattractant-mediated transient activation and
membrane localization of Akt/PKB is required for efficient chemotaxis to cAMP in Dictyostelium. EMBO J. 18, 2092–2105.
4. Servant, G., Weiner, O.D., Herzmark, P., Balla, T., Sedat, J.W.,
and Bourne, H.R. (2000). Polarization of chemoattractant receptor signaling during neutrophil chemotaxis. Science 287, 1037–
1040.
5. Insall, R., Kuspa, A., Lilly, P.J., Shaulsky, G., Levin, L.R., Loomis,
W.F., and Devreotes, P. (1994). CRAC, a cytosolic protein containing a pleckstrin homology domain, is required for receptor
and G protein-mediated activation of adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium. J. Cell Biol. 126, 1537–1545.
6. Wang, Y., Liu, J., and Segall, J.E. (1998). MAP kinase function
in amoeboid chemotaxis. J. Cell Sci. 111, 373–383.
7. Chen, L., Janetopoulos, C., Huang, Y.E., Iijima, M., Borleis, J.,
and Devreotes, P.N. (2003). Two phases of actin polymerization
display different dependencies on PI(3,4,5)P3 accumulation and
have unique roles during chemotaxis. Mol. Biol. Cell 14, 5028–
5037.
8. Lim, C.J., Spiegelman, G.B., and Weeks, G. (2001). RasC is
required for optimal activation of adenylyl cyclase and Akt/PKB
during aggregation. EMBO J. 20, 4490–4499.
9. Wessels, D., Brincks, R., Kuhl, S., Stepanovic, V., Daniels, K.J.,
Weeks, G., Lim, C.J., Spiegelman, G., Fuller, D., Iranfar, N., et
al. (2004). RasC plays a role in transduction of temporal gradient
information in the cyclic-AMP wave of Dictyostelium discoideum. Eukaryot. Cell 3, 646–662.
10. Insall, R.H., Borleis, J., and Devreotes, P.N. (1996). The aimless
RasGEF is required for processing of chemotactic signals
through G-protein-coupled receptors in Dictyostelium. Curr.
Biol. 6, 719–729.
11. Chen, M.Y., Long, Y., and Devreotes, P.N. (1997). A novel cyto-

solic regulator, Pianissimo, is required for chemoattractant receptor and G protein-mediated activation of the 12 transmembrane domain adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium. Genes Dev.
11, 3218–3231.
12. Theibert, A., and Devreotes, P.N. (1986). Surface receptor-mediated activation of adenylate cyclase in Dictyostelium. Regulation by guanine nucleotides in wild-type cells and aggregation
deficient mutants. J. Biol. Chem. 261, 15121–15125.
13. Pitt, G.S., Milona, N., Borleis, J., Lin, K.C., Reed, R.R., and
Devreotes, P.N. (1992). Structurally distinct and stage-specific
adenylyl cyclase genes play different roles in Dictyostelium development. Cell 69, 305–315.
14. Kriebel, P.W., Barr, V.A., and Parent, C.A. (2003). Adenylyl cyclase localization regulates streaming during chemotaxis. Cell
112, 549–560.
15. Huang, Y.E., Iijima, M., Parent, C.A., Funamoto, S., Firtel, R.A.,
and Devreotes, P. (2003). Receptor-mediated regulation of
PI3Ks confines PI(3,4,5)P3 to the leading edge of chemotaxing
cells. Mol. Biol. Cell 14, 1913–1922.
16. Lemmon, M.A., and Ferguson, K.M. (2001). Molecular determinants in pleckstrin homology domains that allow specific recognition of phosphoinositides. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 29, 377–384.
17. Nguyen, B.T., Yang, L., Sanborn, B.M., and Dessauer, C.W.
(2003). Phosphoinositide 3-kinase activity is required for biphasic stimulation of cyclic adenosine 3⬘,5⬘-monophosphate by relaxin. Mol. Endocrinol. 17, 1075–1084.
18. Buser, C.A., Sigal, C.T., Resh, M.D., and McLaughlin, S. (1994).
Membrane binding of myristylated peptides corresponding to
the NH2 terminus of Src. Biochemistry 33, 13093–13101.
19. Philip, F., Guo, Y., and Scarlata, S. (2002). Multiple roles of
pleckstrin homology domains in phospholipase C␤ function.
FEBS Lett. 531, 28–32.
20. Iijima, M., and Devreotes, P. (2002). Tumor suppressor PTEN
mediates sensing of chemoattractant gradients. Cell 109,
599–610.

