Cyclic 3',5'-AMP Relay in Dictyostelium discoideum

III . The Relationship of CAMP Synthesis and Secretion
during the CAMP Signaling Response
MARY C. DINAUER, STEVEN A. MACKAY, and PETER N . DEVREOTES
Departments of Biochemistry and of Biophysics and Theoretical Biology, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637

ABSTRACT Refinement of a perfusion technique permitted the simultaneous measurement of
cAMP-elicited [3 H]cAMP secretion and intracellular [3 H]cAMP levels in sensitive D. discoideum
amoebae. These data were compared with measurements of the rate of [32p] CAMP synthesis by
extracts of amoebae sonicated at different times during the CAMP signaling response . CAMP
stimulation of intact cells led to a transient activation of adenylate cyclase, which was blocked
if 10 -' M NaN3 was added with the stimulus . During responses elicited by 10 -6 M CAMP, 10 -8
M CAMP, and an increment in CAMP from 10 -e M to 10 -7 M, the rate of CAMP secretion was
proportional to the intracellular CAMP concentration. Removal of a 10 -6 M CAMP stimulus 2
min after the initiation of the response led to a precipitous decline in intracellular CAMP . This
decline was more rapid than could be accounted for by secretion alone, suggesting intracellular
phosphodiesterase destruction of newly synthesized CAMP . Employing these data and a simple
rate equation, estimates of the time-course of the transient activation of adenylate cyclase and
the rate constants for CAMP secretion and intracellular phosphodiesterase activity were obtained . The calculated rate of CAMP synthesis rose for ^-1 to 2 min, peaked, and declined to
approach prestimulus levels after 3 to 4 min. This time-course agreed qualitatively with direct
measurements of the time-course of activation, indicating that the activation of adenylate
cyclase is a major element in determining the time-course of the CAMP secretion response .
Dictyostelium discoideum grows as free-living amoebae, feeding
upon bacteria until the food supply is exhausted or removed.
The amoebae then aggregate to assemble multicellular structures, each containing -105 cells. Through a process of morphogenesis and differentiation, fruiting bodies are formed,
consisting of a ball of spores held aloft on a slender cellular
stalk. Aggregation is guided by chemotaxis toward cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) signals. Because amoebae
also respond to cAMP signals by secreting additional cAMP,
the signal is relayed from cell to cell over long distances (up to
10 mm). Waves of cAMP, which emanate from centers with a
regular periodicity of 5-10 min, can be visualized in monolayers of aggregating amoebae.' After the passage of each wave,
extracellular cAMP is destroyed by membrane-bound and
secreted phosphodiesterases . The result of these processes is the
orderly assembly of a multicellular form (1, 6, 15, 17).
Our goal is to understand the mechanism of cAMP signaling.
' Tomchik, K. J., and P. N . Devreotes. Manuscript in preparation.
THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 86 AUGUST 1980 537-544
© The Rockefeller University Press - 0021-9525/80/08/0537/08 $1 .00

This process apparently involves the sequential binding of the
signal molecule to the cell surface receptors for cAMP, transduction of the event to the cytoplasmic side of the membrane,
activation of adenylate cyclase, accumulation of intracellular
cAMP, and, finally, its secretion into the medium. No systematic and quantitative kinetic analysis of this sequence of events
has been published. Furthermore, previous studies have employed cell suspensions in which the level of the stimulus and
the recovery of the secreted response were not controlled (7, 8) .
We have therefore measured the time-course of activation of
adenylate cyclase in response to extracellular cAMP . We also
followed the kinetics of accumulation of intracellular cAMP in
response to exogenous cAMP signals and the concomitant
release of this nucleotide into the medium, using a filterperfusion apparatus. These data were correlated to assess the
role of adenylate cyclase activity, intracellular phosphodiesterase activity, and the secretion of cAMP in the regulation of the
signaling response .
537

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Growth and Development of Ax-3
Ax-3, the axenic strain of D . discoideum (l4, 22), was obtained from W. C.
Summers of Yale University. Ax-3 amoebae were grown in suspension at 22'C
in HL-5 medium (per liter : 10 g of dextrose. 10 g of protease peptone no . 3 [Difco
Laboratories, Detroit, Mich .], 5 g of yeast extract [Difco], 0.965 g of Na2H2 PO4,7 H2O, 0.486 g of KH:PO,, 100,000 U of penicillin, and 0.1 g of streptomycin
1141) . Cultures were started from frozen spore stocks and maintained for no more
than 3 mo. Doubling times ranged from 8 to 12 h. Cells were passed before the
culture had reached a density of 5 x 10' cells/ml. Cell density in the stationary
phase was 2 x 10' cells/ml . To initiate differentiation by starvation, cells at a
density of 2-5 x 10' cells/ml were washed by two centrifugations (600 g for 3
min) at 4'C in M-KK2 buffer (2 .31 g of KH 2PO4, 1.00 g of K2 HPO<, 0.5 g of
Mg SO, per liter solution, pH 6.2), resuspended in M-KK2 at a density of 2 x 10'
cells/ml, and shaken for 5-6 h (gyratory shaker, model G-2, 1-cm radius. 225
rpm; New Brunswick Scientific Co ., Edison, N. J.) at 22°C .

CAMP and Adenylate Cyclase Activity in Ax3 Suspension
After 5-6 h of starvation in suspension, cells were washed twice in M-KK-,
and resuspended at a density of 2 x 10' cells/ml . After -20 min at 22 °C, the
CAMP signaling responses ofthe cells were synchronized in suspension by adding
5 ul of 10 -`' M CAMP per milliliter of cell suspension every 7 min. The final
stimulus was usually 10 pl 10' M CAMP, I M dithiothreitol (DTT) per milliliter
of suspension. The concentration of total CAMP (intracellular plus extracellular
CAMP) in the cell suspensions was estimated with the erythrocyte ghost isotope
dilution assay as previously described (3). Adenylate cyclase activity measurements followed the methods of Roos and Gerisch (19). 500 AI of cell suspension
were mixed with 50 Al of 2 M sucrose, 10 HIM EDTA, 0.5 M Tris-HCI (pH 8)
and 100 mM DTT and sonicated for 2-5 s (on a Branson Sonifier, model W-140,
setting 3.5 ; Branson Sonic Power Co., Danbury, Conn.) . 1001ul of the sonicate
were added to 10 I1 of 50 mM MgC12, 100 mM DTT, 50 mM CAMP, 1 M creatine
phosphate, I mg/ml creatine phosphokinase (Sigma Chemical Co., St . Louis,
.
Mo .), 5 mM ATP, and 250 ACi/ml ATP-(y-''2P) After I min at 22°C, 100111 of
I% SDS was added . [''ZP]cAMP was purified according to the methods of Salomon
et al. (21) .

Growth of NC-4
Dictyosteflum discoideum Raper, strain NC-4, and Enterobacter aerogeness
(stock nos. 11735 and 1304B, respectively) were obtained from the American
Type Culture Collection .
Liquid E. aerogenes cultures were prepared by growing a colony of E.
aerogeness in 50 ml of nutrient broth (5 .0 g of dextrose, 5.0 g of bactopeptone
[Difco], 0.5 g of yeast extract [Difco] per liter of M-KK Z] for 1-2 days without
shaking . E. aerogenes was propagated as colonies by streaking a liquid culture
onto nutrient agar plates (2% agar in nutrient broth). After 2 d of growth at room
temperature, plates were stored at 4'C for up to a month before use.
To grow and propagate NC-4 cells, spores were harvested from fruiting bodies
and mixed with a I- to 2-day liquid E. aerogenes culture. After spore density was
determined with a hemocytometer, aliquots were mixed with 0.2 ml of liquid E.
aerogenes culture and spread evenly on nutrient agar plates. Plating densities
were calculated from the estimated doubling time of 4 h to yield 5 x 10 7 NC-4
cells/plate after a 24-h incubation at 22 °C. After growth to higher densities,
patchy clearing of the confluent bacterial lawn occurs. Plates were harvested for
starvation after 20-24 h of growth, with some reserved fordevelopment to fruiting
bodies . Every 3-4 mo, NC-4 cultures were restarted from frozen spore stocks .
Spores were plated as described and passed through the entire life-cycle two to
three times before being used to grow amoebae for experiments.

[3H]Adenosine Labeling and

Development of NC-4

3 x l0' cpm.

Measurement of Intracellular and
Extracellular CAMP
PERFUSION APPARATUS : Our objective was to measure changes in intracellular and secreted CAMP elicited by exogenous CAMP stimuli of defined
magnitude and duration . D. discoideum amoebae can modify the extracellular
CAMP concentration in their environment both by secretion of additional CAMP
and by phosphodiesterase destruction of CAMP. However, we have shown that
rapid perfusion maintains a constant exogenous CAMP concentration and removes secreted CAMP effectively (3). Equilibrium binding of CAMP to surface
receptors is rapidly achieved (11) . Therefore, during each successive drop (5 s) .
the receptor occupancy should become adjusted to the applied CAMP concentration and little secreted CAMP should remain bound to cellular sites . Because the
perfusion technique also rapidly separates secreted CAMP from cells, it permits
the simultaneous estimation of intracellular and secreted CAMP.
The eight-filter perfusion apparatus employed is illustrated in Fig. 1 . The
details of its construction (i.e ., filter holders, tubing connections, etc.) follow those
described for a single filter perfusion apparatus (3). Perfusion solutions were
delivered via an eight-channel Gilson Minipuls (Gilson Medical Electronics, Inc.,
Middleton, Wis.) pump . Flow rates were made nearly identical among the
channels at I drop/5-6 s. Perfusion solutions were abruptly switched as follows.
The lines leading to the pump were transferred to the new solution. This
introduced an air bubble into each of the pump lines. Just before the air bubble
emerged, the bar supporting the pump lines was lifted from above the filters . The
"rabbit" control of the Gilson Minipuls pump was used to rapidly clear the air
bubble from the lines, starting the flow of the new solution . The support bar was
then repositioned above the filters . The entire procedure required - 15 s, during
which time the filters were not perfused . Time 0 was taken as the moment the
first drop of new solution fell onto the filters .
SYNCHRONIZATION OF CELLS : At the time ofharvest, the[''H]adenosinelabeled amoebae showed visible signs of aggregation . Because some of the
aggregating cells are likely to be signaling when harvested, they initially might
vary in their ability to respond to external CAMP. To synchronize the amoebae,
freshly harvested amoebae were loaded onto filters and perfused with M-KK, for
3-5 min. A stimulus of 10-" M CAMP was applied for 2-3 min and the perfusion
buffer was then switched back to M-KK2 alone. After 8-10 min of recovery . the
test stimulus was given, as indicated in Results, and intracellular and extracellular
[''H]CAMP were monitored .
PURIITC .ATION OF CAmp : Toquantitatively compare amounts ofintracel-

Conditions for

NC-4 amoebae were washed off nutrient agar plates with M-KK 2 and freed
of bacteria by two to three centrifugations (600 g for 3 min) at 4°C. Amoebae
were then shaken at a density of 5 x 10' cells/ml with ['H]adenosine-labeled E.
coii (3). After 3 h at 22 °C, amoebae were freed of labeled bacteria by two
centrifugations (600 g for 3 min) . Labeled amoebae were resuspended in M-KK=
and transferred to nutrient-free agar plates (2% agar in M-KK2) in a volume of
20O Al (for petri dishes of 35-mm diameter, Falcon 1008; Falcon Labware. Div.
Becton, Dickinson & Co ., Oxnard, Calif.) or 400 Al (60-mm diameter petri dishes,
Falcon 1007). Plating density was 0.7-I x 10" cells/cm'. Cells were spread by

538

shaking and swirling the plates. Lids were not put on until excess surface moisture
had disappeared after 10-20 min. Plates were then incubated in a humidified
chamber in the dark at 7'C for l7-18 h or at 22'C for 5-7 h. Before using
amoebae developed at 7'C in an experiment, the plate was transferred to a 22'C
incubator for 30-45 min. When the first signs of aggregation became visible, cells
were harvested by gently flushing the plates with I-2 ml of M-KK=. Identical
aliquots were pipetted onto eight filters (Millipore SSWPO 1300, Millipore Corp . .
Bedford, Mass .) in the perfusion apparatus, as described below. All experiments
were carried out at 19'-22 °C. The number of cells per filter ranged from 0.5-1 .5
x 10' cells. Total filter radioactivity, determined by counting an aliquot of
amoebae in I ml 1% Triton and 7 ml Triton-toluene fluor (3), ranged from 0.5-

THÉ JOURNAL of CELL BIOLOGY - VOULmc 86, 1980

FIGURE

1

An eight-filter perfusion apparatus. Drawn to the scale

of a filter holder, which is 13 mm in diameter .

lular and secreted [''H]cAMP, [8-"C]CAMP (53.1 mCi/mmól, New England
Nuclear, Boston, Mass .) was used as an internal standard . Secreted [''H]cAMP
was collected into 100 lil of a phosphodiesterase stopping solution (8% formic
acid, 10 -" M cAMP) containing 50-80 cpm of ['"C]cAMP. At each time-point,
one filter was removed from the apparatus and inverted into 250 pl of stopping
solution containing the same number of counts per minute as the 100 la[ of
extracellular stopping solution . After purification, the [''H]cAMP/["C]cAMP
ratio for the filter was used to quantitate the amount of [''H]cAMP associated
with the cells at a time-point, while the [''H]cAMP/['"C]cAMP ratio for the
perfusate gave the total amount of ['H]cAMP secreted up to that moment .
The extracellular perfusates (usually 3-5 ml) and 200-1i1 aliquots of the
material extracted from the filters were frozen at -20° C. After drying under
vacuum, the residue was resuspended in l ml of M-KK_ and applied to a I -ml
Bio-Rad AG 50W-X4 column (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Richmond, Calif.) . Columns were eluted as described previously (3) except that the eluate containing
cAMP was eluted directly into a second column containing I g of neutralalumina
(Bio-Rad) preequilibrated with 50 mM Tris-HCI, pH 7.5 . The alumina columns
were eluted directly into scintillation vials with 6 ml of 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH
7 .5) . The solution in the vials was then evaporated to dryness at 65 ° C, and
samples were processed and counted as previously described (3). Recovery of
[''H]cAMP was -60% for both filter extracts and extracellular perfusates.
The effectiveness of the purification method for intracellularcAMP was tested
by analysis of the radioactivity eluted from the alumina columns. In this experiment, alumina columns were eluted with 100 mM N-ethyl morpholine (pH 7 .5),
which elutes an identical amount of radioactivity as 100 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.5).
Samples were evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 100 lil H_O, and examined
by thin-layer chromatography as previously described (3). Little of the cellassociated radioactivity present before application of the stimulus was ['H]cAMP,
whereas essentially all of the increase in cell-associated radioactivity after stimulation was [''H]cAMP . The fold increase in cell-associated [''H]cAMP is therefore
greater than appears in the experiments reported here . This control experiment,
however, suggests that a low, constant background can be subtracted from each
time-point and that changes in the ''H/'"C ratio accurately reflect changes in the
level of intracellular ['H]cAMP .

Quantitative Analysis of Intracellular and
Extracellular CAMP
To compare intracellular levels of cAMP and cAMP secretion rate, it was
necessary to compute the secretion rate from the graph of extracellular [''HlcAMP/['"C]cAMP ratios vs. time . This was accomplished by first hand-fitting a
curve to the extracellular cAMP data points. This curve was then entered into a
specially designed computer system (18) using a sonic digitizing pen (Graph/Pen,
Scientific Accessories Corp., Southport, Conn .) . The derivative of this curve was
computed using Lagrangian interpolation polynomials (10) . Small irregularities
in the curve were introduced because the curve was traced by hand to enter the
data into the computer system . Median smoothing of the derivative was used to
eliminate single anomalous points; however, some small fluctuations in the
computed derivative remained (e.g ., Fig. 2) to which no significance is attached.
The same procedure was followed for intracellular [''H]cAMP/['"C]cAMP ratios
to compute dI/di (I, intracellular cAMP level; t, time) for purposes of computing
adenylate cyclase activity .

RESULTS

Responses Elicited by Continuous Stimuli of
High Concentration
Our initial objective was to correlate intracellular cAMP
levels with the rate of secretion of cAMP during responses
elicited by a nearly saturating stimulus, 10-6 M cAMP . As
previously demonstrated (3, 4), when the stimulus concentration was held constant by rapid perfusion with 10-6 M cAMP,
the cAMP secretion rate rose and fell with a characteristic timecourse (Fig. 2, dotted curve) . The cAMP secretion rate was
calculated by taking the derivative of the curve showing the
total cAMP secreted as a function of the stimulus duration
(Fig . 2, open symbols) . The rate rose geometrically for 2-3 min
and returned to baseline levels within 10-15 min. The decline
in the cAMP secretion rate began abruptly and had rapid (t1/z
= 2 min) and slow (t1/2 = 5-6 min) components . Thus, the
major portion of the profile had a "sawtooth" appearance

to
MINUTES

Response to a continuous 10 -6 M cAMP stimulus . Labeled, differentiated NC-4 amoebae were placed in the perfusion
apparatus and synchronized with cAMP as described in Materials
and Methods. The perfusion solution was then switched to one
containing 10 -6 M cAMP (time 0, above) . This stimulus was maintained for 20 min (dashed lines) . Plotted is the ratio of [ 3 H]cAMP/
[' °C]cAMP recovered in each of the intracellular (closed symbols)
or extracellular (open symbols) samples. The data from two experiments carried out on the same day are shown (squares or circles) .
Amoebae from one nutrient-free agar plate were used for each
experiment. The data from the second experiment (circles) were
normalized such that the final extracellular [ 3 H]cAMP/['"C]cAMP
ratio equaled that of the first experiment (squares) . The unnormalized final extracellular ratio in the second experiment was 13 .2 . The
thin dotted line is the cAMP secretion rate calculated as the derivative of the accumulated extracellular [ 3 H]cAMP/[' ° C]cAMP, scaled
so that its peak height was equal to that of the intracellular 3 H/'"C
ratio. The experiment was repeated four times with similar results .
FIGURE 2

followed by a slow decline to prestimulus levels . Perfusion with
higher stimulus concentration (10-" M) elicited responses of
similar magnitude and time-course .
When cells were treated with a sustained stimulus of l0 -`' M
cAMP, the level of intracellular cAMP rose rapidly from basal
levels and then fell spontaneously (Fig. 2) . The falling phase of
the intracellular cAMP level appeared to have two components .
Intracellular cAMP dropped to -30°ío of its peak value after 5
min of stimulation . It then declined slowly and by 20 min, the
longest time monitored, it had not quite reached the prestimulus level . The change in intracellular cAMP levels was thus
qualitatively similar to that in the cAMP secretion rate . They
rose with the same time-course, peaked after about 2 min, and
declined at nearly the same rate .

Responses Elicited by Continuous Stimuli of
Low Concentration
Fig. 3 shows a representative response to a continuous
-e
stimulus of 10 M cAMP . (The total amount of cAMP secreted
at this stimulus concentration is -10-30% of that secreted in
response to 10 -6 M cAMP .) The time-course of the response
was similar to that elicited by 10-6 M cAMP . The changes in
both intracellular cAMP levels and cAMP secretion rates had
a sawtooth profile; however, the half-width was slightly narrower in response to 10 -6 M cAMP than to 10 -6 M cAMP . As
with responses to 10 -6 M cAMP, the time-course of the intracellular cAMP accumulation and cAMP secretion rate were
quite similar . Thus, the secretion rate was directly proportional
to the intracellular cAMP level during the response to both
subsaturating and saturating stimuli.
DINAUER LT

AL .

cAMP Synthesis and Secretion in D . discoideum

539

z 'U)
LU
Ez
aU
M
0

MINUTES

Response to a continuous 10 -e M cAMP stimulus . Protocal was identical to that in Fig. 2 except that a stimulus of 10 -e M
cAMP was given at time 0. This stimulus was maintained for 15 min
(as indicated by the dashed lines) . The [3H]cAMP/['"C]CAMP ratio
is plotted for each of the intracellular (closed symbols) and extraFIGURE 3

cellular (open symbols) samples. The unnormalized final extracellular ratio in the second experiment (circles) was 3 .12 . Thin dotted
line is the calculated secretion rate . The experiment was repeated
three times with similar results .

Responses Elicited by Increments in
Stimulus Concentration
The response to a given cAMP stimulus eventually subsides
because of adaptation, but an increment in the stimulus concentration will elicit a second response (4). The time-course of
the response to the increment is similar to that elicited by the
initial stimulus except that the initial rate of increase in cAMP
secretion rate is more rapid and the peak secretion rate occurs
sooner (5).
In Fig. 4, we demonstrate that the more rapid increase in the
cAMP secretion rate after an increment in the stimulus reflects
an increased rate of accumulation of intracellular cAMP . A 5min stimulus of 10-8 M cAMP was immediately followed by
one of 10 - ' M cAMP . The changes in intracellular and extracellular cAMP were monitored during the second response.
The intracellular cAMP level rose more rapidly in response to
the increment than in response to the initial stimulus (cf. Fig.
3) . Intracellular cAMP increased from near basal levels at the
onset of the 10 - ' M cAMP stimulus, reached a peak value by
30 s, and then rapidly declined . The accelerated rise in intracellular cAMP shown in Fig. 4 accounts for the rapid rise in
the secretion rates typically observed in response to increments
in the cAMP stimulus (5).

Time-course of Adenylate Cyclase Activity
during Continuous Stimulation
It has not been possible to activate D. discoideum adenylate
cyclase with cAMP in cell homogenates. When cell suspensions
were stimulated with cAMP before lysis, the enzyme in the
homogenate showed increased activity that persisted for --45
s (7, 12, 19, 20). Homogenates prepared several minutes after
the addition of the stimulus no longer showed increased adenylate cyclase activity . It is unclear whether the transient
elevation of enzyme activity reflected a spontaneous deactivation of the enzyme or the destruction of the extracellular cAMP
stimulus .
To test the effects of prolonged cAMP stimulation on ade540

THE JOURNAL OF CELL

BIOLOGY " VOLUME 86, 1980

nylate cyclase activity, we sought a method to maintain a
relatively constant cAMP stimulus concentration . We stimulated suspensions of amoebae with 10 -6 M CAMP and added
10 mM DTT, a phosphodiesterase inhibitor (2, 9), to maintain
the stimulus at a high level. As seen in Fig. 5, adenylate cyclase
activity progressively increased in response to the stimulus,
reaching a maximum after - 1 min of stimulation. Despite the
persistence of the stimulus, adenylate cyclase activity then
rapidly declined, approaching prestimulus rates within 3 min
of the onset of the stimulus . The slight elevation persisting at
subsequent times may be the source of the slow decline in the
intracellular cAMP level during a continuous 10' M stimulus
in Fig. 2.

Effect of Sudden Removal of a CAMP Stimulus
We previously demonstrated that the removal of the stimulus
at any time during a response resulted in a rapid decline in the
CAMP secretion rate (3, 4) . This observation is consistent with
the rapid dissociation of cAMP-receptor complexes (t,/z = 4 s)
(16) . The abrupt decrease in the secretion rate suggests that
continuous occupation of surface cAMP binding sites is necessary to maintain either cAMP transport or the continued
production of intracellular cAMP. To evaluate this issue, cells
were perfused for 2 min with 10-6 M cAMP and then with
buffer alone. Intracellular cAMP levels began to fall as soon as
the stimulus was removed (Fig. 6) . Secretion of cAMP continued until intracellular cAMP had declined to basal levels. This
result indicates that cAMP production depends on the continued presence of the stimulus, whereas secretion of cAMP does
not.

4

0

2

6

MINUTES
FIGURE 4
Responses to a stimulus increment from 10 -8 M to 10 -'
M cAMP . Protocol was similar to that in Fig. 2 . However, after a
stimulus of 10 -8 M cAMP had been applied for 5 min, the concentration of the cAMP stimulus was then suddently increased to 10 - '
M (time 0, above) . The [ 3H]cAMP/['"C]cAMP ratio is plotted for
each of the intracellular (closed symbols) and extracellular (open
symbols) samples. Again, the results of two experiments are shown .
The unnormalized final extracellular ratio in the second experiment
(circles) was 3 .8 . Results similar to those shown in Fig. 4 were also
obtained when the external cAMP concentration was raised to 5 x
-s M
10 -e M cAMP immediately after a 5- or 7- min stimulus of 10
cAMP .

Inhibition of Adenylate Cyclase Activation by
NaN 3

10

The signaling response is rapidly inhibited by NaN3 (Fig . 7) .
When 10 - " M NaN3 was added with a 10-6 M cAMP stimulus,
no cAMP secretion was elicited. When 10-" M NaN3 was
introduced after 75 s of stimulation with 10 -6 M cAMP, the
secretion of cAMP declined rapidly. The fall in the secretion
rate was essentially identical to that observed when the stimulus
itself was removed.
NaN3 does not antagonize cAMP binding to surface sites, in
that the equilibrium binding of 10 -e M or 5 x 10-7 M [3H]cAMP to cells was unaffected by 10 - " M NaN 3 (data not
shown) . Furthermore, the inhibition of the signaling response
is not attributable solely to the depletion of ATP as a substrate
for the adenylate cyclase. NaN3, an inhibitor of oxidative
phosphorylation, does cause a rapid reduction in ATP levels in

N
N

ó
s
E
a

5

20

Time-course of adenylate cyclase activity during continuous CAMP stimulation . Unlabeled Ax-3 amoebae in suspension
were synchronized as described in Materials and Methods. The
experiment illustrates the fourth and fifth synchronization cycles
(28 and 35 min) . At 34 min, the suspension was adjusted to 10 -6 M
cAMP, 10 mM DTT as indicated. At 1-min intervals, 50/1 of suspension were removed for determination of total CAMP ; 500 ,ul were
removed, sonicated, and 100pl used for determination of adenylate
cyclase activity . 1,000 cpm of [32p]cAMP corresponds to -25 pmol
of CAMP . The experiment was repeated four times with similar

100

FIGURE 5

results.
6

2
4

2

FIGURE 6 Response to a 2-min 10 -6 M cAMP stimulus . Protocol
was similar to that in Figs . 2 and 3. A 10 -6 M cAMP stimulus was
applied (time 0, above) for 2 min, as indicated by the dashed lines,
and followed by buffer alone . Plotted is the ratio of [3H]cAMP/-

4

MINUTES

6

FIGURE 7 Inhibition of responses to cAMP by NaN3 . In this experiment, [ 3H]adenosine-labeled, aggregating NC-4 amoebae from a
single nutrient-free agar plate were divided among three separate
filters. The four-filter perfusion apparatus employed is similar to
that described in detail in Fig. 3. After transfer to the filters, amoebae
were perfused for 20 min with M-KK2, stimulated with 10 -e M CAMP
for 2 min, and perfused with M-KK2 for 15 min. Stimuli were then
introduced simultaneously, as indicated by the first arrow. One filter
was perfused with a continuous 10 -6 M CAMP stimulus (--~-) .
The second filter was perfused with a combination of 10 -6 M CAMP
and 10 -° M NaN3 (-A-) . The third filter received 10-6 M cAMP
alone for 75 s, followed by 10 -6 M CAMP plus 10 -° M NaN3, as
indicated by the second arrow (--0--) . The experiment was repeated five times with similar results .

[' °C] CAMP recovered in each of the intracellular (closed symbols)
or extracellular (open symbols) samples. The data from three experiments carried out on the same day are shown. All of the data from
the second and third experiments (circles and triangles) were normalized such that the final extracellular [3H]cAMP/['"C]CAMP ratio
equaled that of the first experiment (squares) . The actual final
extracellular ratio in the second experiment (circles) was 5.8 and
that of the third (triangles) was 4.7 . The experiment was repeated
twice with similar results.
DINAUER ET At .

cAMP Svnthesis and Secretion in D . discoideum

541

200

Z
N

a

100

U

25

30

MINUTES

35

FIGURE 8 Inhibition of activation of adenylate cyclase by NaN3. 10
ml of a suspension of unlabeled Ax-3 amoebae were synchronized

as described in Materials and Methods . The experiment illustrates
the fourth synchronization cycle (28 min) . At 26 min (--0--) and
28 min (-0-), 3 ml were removed to separate 10-ml beakers and
adjusted to 10 -° M NaN3 . The remaining 4 ml served as control
(-0-) . At 28 .5 min, all three cell suspensions were adjusted to
10 -6 M cAMP, 10 mM DTT. Each minute, 500-p1 aliquots of each
suspension were removed and sonicaed, and 100 81 of each were
processed in parallel for adenylate cyclase activity . The experiment
was repeated three times with similar results .
these cells (t,/2 = 8 s) . 2 However, as illustrated in Fig. 8, NaN3
had a direct effect on the activation of adenylate cyclase. In
this experiment, 10-" M NaN 3 was added to a cell suspension
just before the introduction of a cAMP stimulus . The activity
of adenylate cyclase measured in sonicates did not increase,
even though 0.5 mM ATP was present in the reaction mixture.
NaN3 added to sonicates did not inhibit activated adenylate
cyclase. These results, taken together, suggest that there is a
step between the binding of cAMP to surface sites and the
activation of adenylate cyclase that can be blocked by NaN3.

DISCUSSION
It is evident that the rate of cAMP secretion is closely linked to
the level of intracellular cAMP under a variety of conditions .

z To measure ATP levels after introduction of NaN3, we used the eightfilter perfusion apparatus. Amoebae that had not been labeled with
l''H]adenosine were developed to the early aggregation stage, harvested,
gently pipetted onto eight filters (106 cells/filter), and synchronized as
described in Materials and Methods. Filters were then perfused with
NaN,. Two filters were removed just before the initiation of perfusion
with NaN3, the other six at subsequent time-points. Filters were
inverted into 200 Id of 8% formic acid. Later, equal aliquots were
applied to cellulose thin-layer plates (Eastman-Kodak, Rochester, N.
Y.) and chromatographed (3). The ATP region was scraped and eluted
in 1 ml of 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7) . The ATP content of each sample
was determined by the luciferin-luciferase method, employing a scintillation counter to measure light production (l3) . Values were expressed as a percent of the two control filters removed just before
introduction of NaN3 . Within 30 s, ATP levels had fallen to 5% .
54 2

THE JOURNAL Or CELL BIOLOGY - VOLUME 80, 1980

The cAMP secretion rate rose and fell in parallel with intracellular cAMP in response to sustained stimuli (Figs. 2-4) .
Upon removal of the stimulus, both intracellular cAMP and
the cAMP secretion rate declined abruptly (Fig. 6) . There is
thus no evidence for regulation of the response at the cAMP
secretion step . cAMP is synthesized and transiently accumulated before release, with no long-term storage. Under a variety
of experimental conditions, the cAMP secretion rate was directly proportional to intracellular CAMP . This result disagrees
with that of Gerisch and Wick (8). They reported a 30-s lag
between the changes in intracellular and extracellular cAMP
in suspensions of amoebae under conditions in which the level
of CAMP was spontaneously oscillating.
The parallel changes in intracellular cAMP levels and the
rate of CAMP secretion observed in this study indicate a
pseudo-first-order relationship between intracellular cAMP
and its transport. This implies that the putative transport
mechanism is not saturated at the highest intracellular cAMP
levels observed (e .g ., during stimulation with 10-6 M cAMP).
These peak levels are estimated to be 5-10 pM (4, 8) . A pseudofirst-order rate constant for the secretion step, Kç, was estimated
using the relationship between the measured changes in the
intracellular [3H]cAMP/[ `4C]CAMP ratio and the derivatives of
the extracellular [''H]cAMP/[ ' 4C]cAMP ratios from the experiments shown in Figs . 2 and 3. (It was assumed that all
intracellular cAMP was available for secretion.) The value of
KS was 0.34 min-' and 0.94 min-' for the experiments shown
in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively, and did not vary significantly
across the time-course of the signaling response . The different
rate constants might represent technical or developmental differences (e .g ., different levels of transport activity) between
experiments carried out on different days rather than a dependence of transport rate on stimulus size .
There was a discrepancy between the between the recovery
of intracellular and secreted cAMP . The total [''H]cAMP secreted in response to 10-6 M cAMP was equal to - 1 .5 x the
peak intracellular value. However, when intracellular [''H]cAMP was at its peak value, the sum of the intracellular and
extracellular [3H]cAMP levels (i .e., the total cAMP in the
system) was 1 .5 x greater than the intracellular cAMP level,
equaling the total amount of [3H]cAMP secreted by the end of
the response . This simple bookkeeping suggests there is destruction of some 1 3H]cAMP during the course of the response . The
same conclusion was obtained by an analysis of the data in
Figs . 3 and 6.
We performed two tests of whether extracellular phosphodiesterases reduced the recovery of secreted [3H]cAMP . In the
first, DTT was used to inhibit both secreted and membranebound phosphodiesterase activity (2, 9) . We compared responses elicited by stimuli of 10 -' M cAMP in the presence
and absence of 10 mM DTT . Although 10 mM DTT had a
slight inhibitory effect on the magnitude of the response, it had
little effect on the ratio of intracellular to extracellular cAMP
levels . In the second test, we raised the stimulus concentration
to 10 -4 M cAMP to provide greater protection from extracellular phosphodiesterase . However, the relative recovery of
intracellular and extracellular cAMP was unaffected by the
100-fold increase in exogenous cAMP . As a further control,
4
[' C]cAMP was routinely added to collection vessels and the
[3H]label recovered was normalized for destruction and all
other losses after its collection. We conclude that secreted
[3H]cAMP was not degraded by extracellular phosphodiesterases nor preferentially lost during subsequent purification in
these experiments .

Independent of the precise mechanism of CAMP secretion,
it was possible to analyze the kinetics of cAMP production
from the simultaneous measurements of intracellular and extracellular cAMP levels . We used a simple rate equation :
d1(t) = V(t) - dE(t) KI(t)
dt
dt

(1)

where I(t) = intracellular cAMP level at time t, V(t) = rate of
synthesis of cAMP at time t, E(t) = amount of extracellular
CAMP by time t, and K, = first-order rate constant for destruction of intracellular cAMP. It is assumed that phosphodiesterase destruction of intracellular cAMP is first order and all
intracellular cAMP is available for secretion and destruction.
To estimate KP, the pseudo-first-order rate constant of phosphodiesterase, we considered the experiment shown in Fig. 6.
The decline in the cAMP secretion rate when extracellular
cAMP is removed has a time-course identical to that seen when
NaN 3 is introduced (see Results) . Other data suggest that NaN 3
rapidly blocks the activation of adenylate cyclase (Fig. 7).
Therefore, we assumed that at the point of stimulus removal in
the experiment shown in Fig. 6, the rate of cAMP production,
V(t), dropped abruptly to zero. Eq. 1 can then be solved for K,
in terms of measured quantities .
Kp

[dI(t lI(t)
- dt )
+ d dt t)/I(t)

KP was calculated according to Eq. 2 employing the data from
Fig. 6 for changes in I(t) and E(t) after the stimulus was
removed . A plot of -[dI(t)/dt + dE(t)/dt] vs. I(t) was linear;
the slope, equal to KP, was 1.73 min - '. This result supports the
premise that phosphodiesterase destruction ofcAMP is pseudofirst-order under these experimental conditions.
By assuming that K, has the same constant value during the
response, we calculated V(t), the rate of cAMP synthesis during
the course of the signaling response, from Eq. 1 . We used the

20-

0

Calculated rate of cAMP synthesis during a stimulus of
ratios measured for intracellular and secreted cAMP during a 10 -6 M cAMP stimulus were taken
from Fig . 2 and analyzed as described in the text . Eq . 1 was used to
calculate the rate of cAMP synthesis, V(t) . El, V(t) . x, K p l (the rate
of cAMP degradation) . E, d E(t)/d t (the rate of cAMP secretion) . O,
d I(t)/d t (the rate of change in intracellular cAMP) . Dashed vertical
line passes through the peak of K p l and d E(t)/d t, which occurs 0 .50 .8 min later than the peak in V(t) .
FIGURE 9

10 -6 M cAMP . [ 3 H]cAMP/['"C]cAMP

data in Fig. 2 to provide 1(t) and E(t) during a 10-b M CAMP
stimulus. dE(t)/dt, dI(t)/dt, and KpI(t) were calculated from
the measured E(t) and I(t) values. V(t), equal to the sum of
dI(t)/dt, dE(t)/dt, and KpI(t), is illustrated in Fig. 9, along
with KpI(t), dI(t)/di, and dE(t)/dt. The calculated rate of
cAMP synthesis rose and fell during the continuous 10-6 M
cAMP stimulus . It is noteworthy that V(t) peaked at - 1-2 min,
before the peak in KpI(t) and dE(t)/dt. V(t) then decreased
sharply, approaching prestimulus values 3-4 min after the
onset of stimulus .
To estimate the amount of intracellular phosphodiesterase
destruction of cAMP, we computed the areas under the curves
for V(t) and dE(t)/dt. The value of the former area indicates
the total amount of cAMP synthesized, while the value of the
latter equals the total amount secreted. The ratio of [EE(t)/dt
At]/[IV(t) At] equaled "0.16 by the end ofthe response to the
continuous 10 -6 M stimulus illustrated in Fig. 2. According to
this analysis, 84% of the newly synthesized cAMP was degraded
intracellularly and the remaining 16% was secreted. (The fraction of intracellular cAMP secreted can also be calculated by
taking the ratio of the first-order rate constant for cAMP
secretion to the sum of those for secretion and phosphodiesterase destruction [i.e., Ks /(Kp + Ks ) = 0.34 min - '/2 .07 min - ' =
0.16] .) Analysis of the response to the continuous 10 -8 M
stimulus shown in Fig. 3 led to a similar result. In this case,
53% of the CAMP was degraded intracellularly, whereas 47%
was secreted. 3
The large amount of intracellular cAMP destruction calculated by this approach deserves comment. It is unlikely that
newly synthesized [3H]cAMP is destroyed by extracellular
phosphodiesterases or preferentially lost during subsequent
purification steps, as discussed above . It is possible that the
assumption that Kp was constant and independent of cAMP
receptor occupancy is not valid. However, the time-course of
the rate of cAMP synthesis, V(t) (Fig. 9), calculated using this
value for KP, closely resembles the experimentally determined
time-course of adenylate cyclase activation (Fig. 5).
In summary, we have defined the temporal relationship
among adenylate cyclase activity, intracellular cAMP levels,
and cAMP secretion during cAMP stimulation of D. discoideum
amoebae . The rate of cAMP secretion is directly proportional
to the level of intracellular cAMP. Our data suggest that a
significant fraction of newly synthesized cAMP is degraded
intracellularly . Nevertheless, the control of the rate of cAMP
secretion during a cAMP stimulus appears to be exerted at the
level of cAMP synthesis. When a cAMP stimulus was introduced and held constant, adenylate cyclase activity increased
for - 1 min, peaked sharply, and then declined to nearly
prestimulus levels within 4 min (Fig. 5). These changes slightly
preceded the observed changes in intracellular cAMP and
closely matched the time-course of V(t) calculated on the basis
of the activities of intact cells (Fig. 9). The agreement between
these two measures strongly suggests that the activity of adenylate cyclase is the major determinant of cAMP secretion
rates in the signaling response.
The authors thank Dr . T. L . Steck for use of his laboratory and
valuable advice, Mr. K . Tomchik for technical assistance, Mr . H .
' The discrepancy between the calculated fractional amount of intracellular cAMP degraded during a 10- ' M stimulus and that degraded
during a 10 -e M cAMP stimulus arises because of the differences in
the quantitative relationship between intracellular cAMP and the rate
of cAMP secretion (i.e ., KS) in Figs . 2 and 3 .
DINAUER Er AE .

cAMP Synthesis and Secretion in D. discoideum

54 3

Cornejo for helpful discussion, and Mr . A . J . Kittler for constructing
the eight-filter perfusion apparatus .
This research was supported by U . S . Public Health Service
(USPHS) grant GM 22321 to T . L . Steck. M . C . Dinaue r is a Medical
Scientist Trainee, supported by USPHS grant GM 07281 . S . A .
MacKay is a Postdoctoral Fellow of the Committee on Developmental
Biology (USPHS grant HD 07136), The University of Chicago . P . N .
Devreotes is a Postdoctoral Fellow of the Damon Runyon-Walter
Winchell Cancer Fund (DRG 17ßF).
Received for publication 1 October /979, and in revised form 7 April
1980.

REFERENCES
I . Bonner, J . T . 1967 . The Cellular Slime Molds . 2nd ed . Princeton University Press,
Princeton, New Jersey .
2 . Chang, Y . Y. 1968 . Cyclic 3',5'-adenosine monophosphale phosphodiesterase produced
by the slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum . Science ( Wash. D. C. ). 160 :57 -59 .
3 . Devreotes . P. N ., P. L . Derstine, and T . L. Steck . 1979 . Cyclic 3',5' AMP relay in
Dictyostelium discoideum. I . A technique to monitor responses to controlled stimuli . J. Cell
Biol. 80 :291-299 .
4. Devreotes, P. N ., and T . L . Steck . 1979 . Cyclic 3',5' AMP relay in Dictyostelium discoideum .
11 . Requirements for initiation and termination of the response . J. Cell Biol. 80 :300-309.
5 . Dinauer, M . C. . T. L . Steck, and P . N . Devremes. 1980 . Cyclic 3',5' AMP relay in
Dictyostelium discoideum. IV . Recovery of the signaling response after CAMP stimulation .
J. Cell Biol. 86:545-553.

544

Ttil JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY - VOLUME 86, 1980

6 . Gerisch, G . 1968. Cell aggregation and differentiation in Dictyostelium. In Current Topics
in Developmental Biology . A . Moscona and A . Montroy, editors. Academic Press. Inc . .
New York . 3 :157-197 .
7 . Gerisch, G ., Y. Maeda, D. Malchow, W. Roos, W . Wick, and B . Wurster. 1977 . Cyclic
AMP signals and the control of cell aggregation in Dictyostelium discoideum . In Development and Differentiation in the Cellular Slime Moulds . P . Capuccinelli and 1 . M .
Ashworth, editors. Elsevier/North-Holland Inc., New York . 105-124 .
8 . Gerisch, G ., and U . Wick . 1975 . Intracellular oscillations and release of cyclic AMP from
Dictyostelium cells. Biochem . Biopbvs . Res. Commun. 65:364-370 .
9 . Green. A .. and P. C . Newell . 1975 . Evidence for the existence of two types of CAMP
binding sites in aggregating cells of Dictyostelium discoideum. Cell. 6:129-136 .
10 . Hilbrand, F . B . 1956 . Introduction to Numerical Analysis. McGraw-Hill. Inc . . New York .
11 . Juliani, M . H., and C . Klein. 1977 . Calcium on effects on cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate binding to the plasma membrane of Dictyostelium discoideum. Biochim. Bioph y.s .
Acta. 497 :369-376 .
12 . Klein, C . 1977. Adenylate cyclase activity in Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae and its
changes during differentiation . FEBS (Fed. Eur. Biochem. Soc) Leu. 68 :125-128 .
13 . LeMasters, J . 1 ., and C . R. Hackenbrock . 1977 . Kinetics of product inhibition during
firefly luciferase luminescence . Biochemistry. 16:445-447 .
14 . Loomis, W . 1971 . Sensitivity of Dictyostelium discoideum nucleic acid analogues . Exp. Cell
Res. 64 :484-486 .
15 . Loomis, W . G . 1975 . Dictyostelium discoideum. A Developmental System . Academic Press,
Inc ., New York.
16 . Mullens, I . A ., and P . C . Newell. 1978 . CAM P binding to cell surface receptors of
Dictyostelium. Differentiation . 10 :171-176 .
18 . Potel, M . J ., R . E . Sayre, and S . A . MacKay. 1980 . Graphics tools for interactive motion
analysis . Computer Graphics and Image Processing . In press.
19 . Roos, W ., and G . Gerisch . 1976 . Receptor-mediated adenylate cyclase activation in
Dictyostelium discoideum. FEBS (Fed £ur. Biochem. Soc) L-etr . 68 :170-- 172.
20 . Roos. W ., C . Scheidegger, and G . Gerisch . 1977 . Adenylate cyclase oscillations as signals
for cell aggregation in Dictyostelium discoideum. Nature (tond.) . 266:259-261 .
21 . Salomon, Y ., C . Londos, and M . Rodbell . 1974. A sensitive assay for adenylate cyclase .
Anal. Biochem. 58:541-548 .
22 . Sussman, R ., and M . Sussman . 1967 . Cultivation of D . discoideum in axenic medium .
Biochem . Biophys . Res. Commun . 29:53-55 .

