Molecular Biology of the Cell
Vol. 20, 3295–3304, July 15, 2009

The Group Migration of Dictyostelium Cells Is Regulated
by Extracellular Chemoattractant Degradation
Gene L. Garcia,*† Erin C. Rericha,‡ Christopher D. Heger,§ Paul K. Goldsmith,§
and Carole A. Parent*
*Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892; †Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21218; ‡Institute for Research in Electronics and Applied Physics, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD 20742; and §Antibody Production and Purification Unit, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892
Submitted March 18, 2009; Revised May 8, 2009; Accepted May 15, 2009
Monitoring Editor: Jean E. Schwarzbauer

Starvation of Dictyostelium induces a developmental program in which cells form an aggregate that eventually differentiates into a multicellular structure. The aggregate formation is mediated by directional migration of individual cells
that quickly transition to group migration in which cells align in a head-to-tail manner to form streams. Cyclic AMP acts
as a chemoattractant and its production, secretion, and degradation are highly regulated. A key protein is the extracellular
phosphodiesterase PdsA. In this study we examine the role and localization of PdsA during chemotaxis and streaming.
We find that pdsAⴚ cells respond chemotactically to a narrower range of chemoattractant concentrations compared with
wild-type (WT) cells. Moreover, unlike WT cells, pdsAⴚ cells do not form streams at low cell densities and form unusual
thick and transient streams at high cell densities. We find that the intracellular pool of PdsA is localized to the
endoplasmic reticulum, which may provide a compartment for storage and secretion of PdsA. Because we find that cAMP
synthesis is normal in cells lacking PdsA, we conclude that signal degradation regulates the external cAMP gradient field
generation and that the group migration behavior of these cells is compromised even though their signaling machinery
is intact.

INTRODUCTION
The process by which cells sense an attractant molecule and
respond by migrating directionally toward it is called chemotaxis. Chemotaxis is essential for a variety of physiological processes in mammals as well as for the survival of
lower eukaryotes. The mechanisms that regulate the directed migration of neutrophils and Dictyostelium discoideum
have been extensively studied previously (van Haastert and
Devreotes, 2004; Bagorda et al., 2006; Friedl and Weigelin,
2008; Stephens et al., 2008). One particular challenge of these
fast-moving cells is to maintain the ability to respond sensitively and rapidly to an attractant signal. Because both
neutrophils and Dictyostelium cells use signal relay loops to
propagate chemoattractant signals, mechanisms must be at
play to maintain detectable levels of chemoattractants. Remarkably, signal degradation also seems to play an important role in the developmental processes of multicellular
organisms. Migration of primordial germ cells in Drosophila
and Zebrafish seems to require degradation of specific lysophospholipids in the former or chemokines in the latter to
allow these cells to find their proper developmental environment (Renault and Lehmann, 2006; Minina et al., 2007).
Many cell types use receptor-mediated degradation to mainThis article was published online ahead of print in MBC in Press
(http://www.molbiolcell.org/cgi/doi/10.1091/mbc.E09 – 03– 0223)
on May 28, 2009.
Address correspondence to: Carole A. Parent (parentc@mail.
nih.gov).
© 2009 by The American Society for Cell Biology

tain detectable levels of chemoattractants. In this context,
cells internalize the bound receptor and as part of the receptor recycling pathway the ligand is released for degradation
(Minina et al., 2007; Boldajipour et al., 2008; Borroni et al.,
2008; Scola et al., 2008). Alternatively, extracellular enzymes
can specifically degrade the extracellular signaling molecules, allowing the sensing machinery to go back to basal
levels and retain high sensitivity (Leidal et al., 2003; Bader et
al., 2007; Van Lint and Libert, 2007; Leung et al., 2008).
Dictyostelium is an excellent model system to study chemotaxis. These social amoebae occur naturally in the soil,
and they exist in two independent life stages: a growth stage
and a developmental stage (Chisholm and Firtel, 2004;
Manahan et al., 2004; Mahadeo and Parent, 2006; Urushihara, 2008). On the onset of starvation conditions, the cells
enter a developmental program that leads to the aggregation
of a group of up to 100,000 cells that eventually form a
multicelluar structure. The formation of the aggregate is
mediated by the cyclic nucleotide cAMP, which serves as a
chemoattractant (Saran et al., 2002; Garcia and Parent, 2008;
McMains et al., 2008). Soon after the onset of starvation,
development is initiated by the expression of the adenylyl
cyclase A (ACA) and the G protein-coupled cAMP receptor
1 (cAR1) as well as other genes involved in intracellular
signaling and sensing of external cAMP (Devreotes, 1994;
Parent and Devreotes, 1996; Aubry and Firtel, 1999; Weeks,
2000). Activation of cAR1 leads to the stimulation of a variety of effectors that control chemotaxis, gene expression, and
signal relay via the activation of ACA and the secretion of
additional cAMP (Parent and Devreotes, 1996; Aubry and
Firtel, 1999). Interestingly, as cells form aggregates, they
3295

G. L. Garcia et al.

acquire the ability to migrate in groups by aligning in a
head-to-tail manner, forming characteristic streams. We
have previously shown that the ability of cells to stream
depends on the enrichment of ACA-containing vesicles at
the back of migrating cells (Kriebel et al., 2003, 2008). We
propose that the formation of head-to-tail arrays is regulated
by the specific release of cAMP from vesicles at the back of
cells.
Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases (PDEs), which catalyze the hydrolysis of the 3⬘-5⬘ phosphodiester bond, are
also up-regulated in early development (Lacombe et al.,
1986; Bader et al., 2007). Four of the seven Dictyostelium PDEs
degrade intracellular cyclic nucleotides, and the remaining
three have extracellular activity (Bader et al., 2007). PdsA
(also called PDE1 or PdeA) is the main PDE that is responsible for the degradation of extracellular cAMP (Lacombe et
al., 1986; Bader et al., 2007). Cells lacking PdsA show no or
greatly reduced extracellular PDE activity and they fail to
aggregate under starvation conditions. (Barra et al., 1980;
Sucgang et al., 1997). This phenotype can be rescued by the
re-expression of PdsA; however, overexpression leads to
aberrant development (Darmon et al., 1978; Faure et al., 1988,
1989). PdsA has been purified from cells and has been extensively characterized biochemically (Gerisch et al., 1972;
Brown and Rutherford, 1980; Blondelet and Brachet, 1981;
Yamasaki and Hayashi, 1982; Franke and Kessin, 1992).
Based upon the presence of PDE activity in cell fractions
enriched for membrane, plasma membrane, or both, it has
been proposed that PdsA exist in a membrane-bound form
and a secreted form (Malchow et al., 1972).
Although intracellular signal transduction mechanisms
regulating chemotaxis and streaming in Dictyostelium have
been extensively studied previously (Insall and Andrew,
2007; Janetopoulos and Firtel, 2008; Kay et al., 2008; Kolsch et
al., 2008; Kortholt and van Haastert, 2008), the role that
extracellular signal degradation plays in these processes has
not been examined. We hypothesize that PdsA, by degrading extracellular cAMP, plays a key role in regulating chemotaxis both by sensitizing the chemoattractant response
and by shaping the gradient during streaming. We therefore
assessed the role of PdsA in actively chemotaxing Dictyostelium cells and determined the cellular distribution of PdsA
during chemotaxis. Our data show that extracellular soluble
form of PdsA is required for the discrimination and propagation of the cAMP signal during chemotaxis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS

Studies Hybridoma Bank maintained by the Department of Biological Sciences at The University of Iowa (Iowa City, IA).

Plasmids, Cell Lines, and Development
The full-length PdsA gene was cloned from genomic DNA isolated from AX3
wild-type (WT) cells by a proteinase K and phenol extraction method adapted
from Sambrook (2001). The reverse primer TAGGATCCAATTATTTAAATACAAATTGGATCACCTT and the forward primer AGGATCCTATTAAAAAATGGCATTAAATAAAAAATTGTAAG were used. The polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) product was cut using a BamHI and inserted into the
BglII site of pB18 (Johnson et al., 1991) or pAB3 (reconstructed pCV5 vector)
(Janetopoulos et al., 2001). The 3⬘ addition of green fluorescent protein (GFP)
or Myc was accomplished by inserting a new restriction site to replace the
stop codon (KpnI and ApaI, respectively). This product was inserted into the
enhanced GFP (Clontech, Mountain View, CA) or pCMV-Myc (Clontech)
vectors and cloned into pB18 or pAB3. For the N-terminal fusions, a mutated
full-length gene was amplified to create two pieces with overlapping ApaI
restriction sites and a short linker sequence. The N-terminal mutant was
formed using the previously mentioned primers and the internal primers CAGTAACGATGGGCCCGGTGGTGGTAGTAATTTTTATAATTTAAATG and
CATTTAAATTATAAAAATTACTACCACCACCGGGCCCATCGTTACTG.
The Myc epitope or enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) sequences
were inserted in frame into the ApaI site of the N-terminal mutant PdsA gene.
Plasmids were electroporated into cells by the method of (Pang et al., 1999) by
using a MicroPulser electroporation device (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules,
CA). Transformed cells were subject to selection with G418 (Geneticin; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) at 2.5–20 ␮g/ml. Cells were plated on a SM agar plate
with a lawn of bacteria and allowed to grow at 22°C (Sussmann, 1966).
Plaques that formed fruiting bodies were selected.
Cell lacking PdsA (UK5 and UK7) were obtained from Richard Kessin
(Columbia University, New York, NY). In all experiments, UK5 and UK7 cells
behaved similarly; for consistency, findings obtained with UK5 cells (which
we refer to as pdsA⫺) are presented in this study. WT (AX3) pdsA⫺ or
transfected cells were grown in shaking cultures in HL5 media to ⬃5 ⫻ 106
cells/ml and processed for development as described previously (Kriebel et
al., 2003). Briefly, cells were washed once in development buffer (DB; 5 mM
Na2HPO4, 5 mM NaH2PO4, pH 6.2, 2 mM MgSO4, and 200 ␮M CaCl2),
resuspended in DB at 2 ⫻ 107 cells/ml, and shaken at 100 rpm for 4 – 8 h with
pulses of 75 nM cAMP every 6 min. To allow pdsA⫺ cells to develop to the
chemotaxis-competent stage, partly purified extracellular media (see below)
was also added every 6 min, just after the cAMP pulse. The cells were then
processed according to the assay performed.

Partly Purified Extracellular Media
Extracellular media (EC) were partly purified from pdsA/pdsA⫺ cells as
described previously, with small modifications (Orlow et al., 1981). In brief,
cells (4 ⫻ 107 cells/ml) were developed for 16 h with 100 nM pulses of cAMP.
The cells were removed by centrifugation, and the EC were centrifuged again
at 13,000 ⫻ g for 30 min (4°C). The EC was subjected to ammonium sulfate
precipitation (1.5 M) for 2 h (4°C), centrifuged at 13,000 ⫻ g for 30 min (4°C),
and the supernatant was retained. Ammonium sulfate precipitation (2.5 M)
was carried out again described above. The pellet was resuspended in PDE
buffer (50 mM Tris and 10 mM MgCl2, pH 7.5) and placed in a Slide-A-Lyzer
dialysis cassette (Pierce Chemical, Rockford, IL) with a 10-kDa permeability
limit and dialyzed overnight at 4°C in PDE buffer with 4 mM DTT. The
cassette was transferred to PDE buffer with 0.1 mM DTT and dialyzed at 4°C
overnight. The solution was removed from the cassette and centrifuged at
48,000 ⫻ g for 30 min to remove any insoluble materials. The supernatant was
aliquoted and stored at ⫺30°C until use.

Reagents
Caffeine, ATP, cAMP, dithiothreitol (DTT), and all other reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) unless otherwise noted.
[␣-32P]ATP was purchased from MP Biomedicals (Irvine, CA).

Antibodies
Antibodies against ACA (Parent and Devreotes, 1995) and cAR1 (Hereld et al.,
1994) were a generous gift from Peter Devreotes (Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD). A rabbit polyclonal antibody to PdsA was created against the
peptide sequence N-LNDYYTPENWNYYSG-C, corresponding to amino acids
60-74 of the protein sequence. Additional rabbit polyclonal antibodies were
generated against three other peptide sequences from the PdsA protein:
amino acids 284-298 (N-ANEFPFSVKVKPFEL-C), amino acids 345-358
(N-KQIKIDKLKAIYIE-C), and amino acids 428-443 (N-TQRVIYQQLKEANNNG-C). The specificity of these antibodies was tested using both concentrated extracellular media as well as lysates including both the total cells and
the extracellular media. Unpurified and affinity-purified forms of the antisera
were tested, and the unpurified serum provided greater sensitivity with little
increase in background over the affinity-purified forms. The antibody to
amino acids 60-74 was able to detect endogenous levels of PdsA greater than
the other antibodies tested. A mouse monoclonal antibody against calnexin
(Muller-Taubenberger et al., 2001) was obtained from the Developmental

3296

Chemotaxis Assays
To examine self-aggregation, cells were developed for 5 h, extensively washed
with PB, and plated at 5 ⫻ 106 cell/35 mm on plates covered with 1.5% agar
in DB. Aggregates and streams were visualized 30 min to 1 h after plating. For
assay of the influence of partly purified EC on self aggregation cells, 100 ␮l of
cells was extensively washed and then plated at a density of 5 ⫻ 106 cells/ml
on eight-well chambered slides (Lab-Tek 155411; Nalge Nunc International,
Rochester, NY) and allowed to adhere. The extracellular media were removed
and replaced with 200 ␮l of PB or partly purified EC at given densities.
Chemotaxis was visualized using time-lapse microscopy. Under-agarose and
micropipette assays were performed as described previously (Parent et al.,
1998; Comer and Parent, 2006).

Western Blotting
The Crieterion gel system (Bio-Rad Laboratories) was used according to the
manufacturer’s instructions for all Western blotting. Immunostaining was
carried out using standard methods. Transferred membranes were briefly
washed in TBS-T (25 mM Tris, 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, pH 7.6, and 0.05%
Tween 20) and blocked overnight in either 4% bovine serum albumin in
Tris-buffered saline/Tween 20 (TBS-T) (for ACA, cAR1, and Myc) or in 4%
nonfat dry milk (for PdsA). Primary antibodies were used at 1:1000 for Myc

Molecular Biology of the Cell

PdsA Regulates Dictyostelium Migration

Figure 1. The developmental defect of pdsA⫺ cells can be rescued by exogenously providing partially purified PEC. (A) Cells were pulsed
with cAMP for 5 h and plated on nonnutrient agar. Pictures were taken 1 h after plating. Data are representative results obtained from at least
three independent experiments. (B) Cells were prepared as described in A and plated into side wells. The center well contains 1 ␮M cAMP.
Images were taken 1 h after plating. Images are representative of at least four independent experiments, each performed in triplicate. (C)
Representative Western blot showing the expression pattern of ACA and cAR1 as a function of time after the onset of starvation with
exogenous cAMP pulsing. The pdsA⫺ cells developed with PEC (pdsA⫺/PEC) were also provided with an exogenous bolus of PEC slightly
after the cAMP pulse (see Materials and Methods for details). (D) Representative Western blot showing the amount of PdsA present in the
supernatant of pdsA⫺/PEC and WT cells at the 6-h time point.

and PdsA and 1:2000 for ACA and cAR1; secondary antibodies (catalog no.
NA934V, horseradish peroxidase [HRP]-linked anti-rabbit and NA931V, HRP
linked anti-mouse, GE Healthcare, Chalfont St. Giles, Buckinghamshire,
United Kingdom) were used at 1:10,000.

Adenylyl Cyclase Activity Assay
Assay was performed as described previously (Comer et al., 2005). Adenylyl
cyclase measurements exhibit considerable variation between experiments.
From day to day, the amount of labeled ATP decreases due to breakdown of
both the isotope and ATP. The most accurate way to compare and display
results is by examining the profile and extent of activation between cell lines
using the same reaction mix on the same day. Therefore we, and others in the
field, have chosen to present adenylyl cyclase activation data as representative of results from at least three independent experiments, each performed in
duplicate on a given day.

Fixation and Immunostaining
Developed cells were either plated uniformly on an eight-well chambered
slide (Lab-Tek, Nalge Nunc International) and allowed to chemotax for 30
min or plated in 5-␮l spots on a two-well chambered slide, overlaid with 1 ml
of PB, and subjected to an attractant gradient. Once the cells were polarized
and chemotaxing, the buffer was gently removed and replaced with an equal
volume of 100% methanol (⫺20°C). After 5 min, the methanol was replaced
with PB and then cells were incubated in blocking solution (10% fetal bovine
serum, 2% normal goat serum, and 0.1% digitonin in PB). Fixed cells were
washed once with PBS ⫹ 0.05% digitonin (PBSD) and then probed with
primary antibody in PBSD ⫹ 10% blocking solution: rabbit polyclonal antiMyc (sc-789; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) at a dilution of 1:200,
mouse monoclonal anti-Myc (sc-40; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) at a dilution of
1:50, mouse anti-calnexin at a dilution of 1:100, or rabbit anti-cAR1 at a
dilution of 1:500. After extensive washing, secondary antibody at a concentration of 2 ␮g/ml in PBSD ⫹ 10% blocking solution was added. All secondary antibodies were from Invitrogen (488 goat anti-mouse, 488 goat antirabbit, 568 goat anti-mouse, and 555 goat anti-rabbit). Nuclear staining was
done with 300 nM 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (D3571; Invitrogen) in PBS
for 5 min.

Microscopy and Image Processing
Fluorescent images were taken on a spinning disk confocal microscope
(PerkinElmer Life and Analytical Sciences, Boston, MA), micropipette images
were taken using either an Axiovert S100 inverted microscope (Carl Zeiss,
Thornwood, NY) attached to a MicroPublisher 3.3 RTV camera (QImaging,
Surrey, BC, Canada) or Axiovert 200 inverted microscope (Carl Zeiss) attached to a CoolSNAP HQ camera (Roper Scientific, Trenton, NJ) using a 10⫻
objective (Carl Zeiss). Images were taken using an MZ125 upright stereomi-

Vol. 20, July 15, 2009

croscope (Leica Microsystems, Deerfield, IL) attached to a MicroPublisher 3.3
RTV camera. Images of self-aggregation were taken on a Axiovert 200 microscope using a BioPrecision 2 multiposition stage (Ludl Electronic Products,
Hawthorne, NY) automated by iVision software (iVision Software, Omaha,
NE). Images were processed using ERS software (PerkinElmer, Boston, MA),
ImageJ (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD), or iVision software.

RESULTS
Addition of Conditioned Buffer Rescues the
Developmental Defect of pdsAⴚ Cells
It has been established previously that cells lacking PdsA fail
to aggregate and differentiate when plated on nonnutrient
agar (Barra et al., 1980; Sucgang et al., 1997). Some mutated
cell lines lacking key signaling proteins have been shown to
enter development and become chemotactically competent
when given exogenous pulses of cAMP (Pitt et al., 1992;
Insall et al., 1994; Bolourani et al., 2006). We therefore tested
whether pdsA⫺ cells can be driven to enter development by
this method. We pulsed cells for 5 h, plated them on nonnutrient agar, and recorded their ability to chemotax and
form aggregates. As expected, 60 min after plating, WT cells
streamed into aggregates; however, the pulsed pdsA⫺ failed
to do so (Figure 1A). Furthermore, the pulsed pdsA⫺ cells
were not able to respond to an externally imposed gradient
of cAMP and migrate directionally (Figure 1B).
We found that the expression pattern of the developmentally regulated signaling proteins ACA and cAR1 was aberrant in pdsA⫺ cells. Whereas WT cells began to express ACA
and cAR1 at 2 h, peaking at 5– 6 h, pdsA⫺ cells expressed
ACA later and to a much lesser extent than WT cells and the
level of cAR1 remained undetectable until 8 h of development (Figure 1C). To rescue the developmental defect of the
pdsA⫺ cells, we partly purified the soluble form of PdsA
from the EC of pdsA⫺ cells overexpressing full-length PdsA
(PdsA/pdsA⫺), which exhibited robust PDE activity, and
added it to starving cells. The purity of the EC was examined
by western blotting using an antibody to PdsA and by
3297

G. L. Garcia et al.

examining protein levels by silver staining. Western blot
analysis of dilutions from the partially purified extracellular
medium preparations, hereafter referred to as PEC, showed
that a one-fifth dilution of PEC isolated from WT cells (2.4
␮g of protein loaded) detected less PdsA than a 1/250 dilution of PEC isolated from PdsA/pdsA⫺ cells (16 ng of protein
loaded) (Supplemental Figure S1). The predominant band in
PEC isolated from PdsA/pdsA⫺ cells was PdsA, whereas
in PEC isolated from WT cells the PdsA was not distinctly
visible (and it did not rescue the developmental defect of
pdsA⫺ cells; see below). This suggests that the PEC made
from overexpressing cells not only contained more PdsA but
also contained less contaminants (Supplemental Figure S1).
PEC (from PdsA/pdsA⫺) was added to starving pdsA⫺ cells
every 6 min just after the cAMP bolus. After 6 h of starvation, the supernatant of developed pdsA⫺ cells had similar
amounts of PdsA compared with WT cells (Figure 1D),
showing that the amount of PdsA exogenously provided is
similar to what WT cells produce. This treatment bypassed
the developmental defect of the pdsA⫺ cells. These cells,
which will be referred as pdsA⫺/PEC cells, expressed ACA
and cAR1 with timing similar to WT cells, although pdsA⫺/
PEC cells did express lower levels of cAR1 (Figure 1C).
Together, these findings show that the exogenous addition
of a PdsA-enriched PEC to pdsA⫺ cells successfully rescues
their ability to reach the chemotaxis-competent stage.
pdsAⴚ/PEC Cells Have Streaming Defects
We next wanted to assess the role of PdsA during chemotaxis to cAMP. We first used the population-based underagarose assay to examine the ability of cells to chemotax to
various concentrations of cAMP. This assay also provides
insight into the ability of cells to relay chemotactic signals to
neighboring cells as their migration in streams is readily
observable when they align in a head-to-tail manner. Figure
2A shows representative images of WT and pdsA⫺/PEC cells
migrating to a subset of cAMP concentrations, and Figure 2B
summarizes the response to a broader concentration range
of cAMP. The ability of WT cells to migrate directionally and
align in a head-to-tail manner was readily observable at
cAMP concentrations ranging from 100 nM to 100 ␮M, although the streaming behavior was weaker at 100 nM
cAMP. We envision that this is due to the fact that fewer
cells respond to low attractant concentrations and that relay
(and streaming) requires a minimum cell density to occur.
Indeed, we found that the apparent amount of WT cells
remaining in the wells decreased with increasing attractant
concentration (Figure 2A). In contrast, pdsA⫺/PEC cells responded to a narrower cAMP concentration range, migrating
to cAMP concentrations between 250 nM and 50 ␮M, and,
most remarkably, forming abnormal, very thick streams compared with WT cells.
We next observed the migration behavior of WT and
pdsA⫺/PEC cells in response to a micropipette filled with
cAMP. Here, again we observed that pdsA⫺/PEC cells respond to a narrower cAMP concentration range. Whereas
WT cells sensed and responded to cAMP concentrations
ranging from 100 nM to 1 mM, pdsA⫺/PEC cells were responsive from 250 nM to 0.1 mM cAMP (data not shown).
Furthermore, the pdsA⫺/PEC cells seemed less polar than
WT cells, displaying a more round, less elongated shape.
Nevertheless, we found that both WT and pdsA⫺/PEC cells
reached comparable chemotactic speeds independently of
the amount of cAMP in the micropipette (data not shown)
and, not surprisingly, pdsA⫺/PEC and WT cells showed a
similar ability to polymerize actin in response to chemoattractant addition, showing the characteristic rapid peak of
3298

cortical F-actin accumulation followed by a return to pseudopod-associated staining (Supplemental Figure S2). We
also found that under normal plating densities (4 ⫻ 104
cells/cm2), WT cells streamed during chemotaxis at all
cAMP concentration tested (Figure 2C; data not shown).
However, as we observed with the under-agarose assay, the
pdsA⫺/PEC cells exhibited streaming defects during chemotaxis to a micropipette. Interestingly, we found the streaming behavior of the pdsA⫺/PEC cells to be dependant on the
cell plating density to a much greater extent than WT cells.
At low cell density (2 ⫻ 104 cells/cm2), the migration of WT
cells to the back of cells ahead of them was readily visible
(Figure 2C and Supplemental Movie 1). In contrast, at similar plating densities, the pdsA⫺/PEC cells migrated toward
the needle as individual cells, only occasionally forming
short transient groups (Figure 2D and Supplemental Movie
2). At higher densities (6 ⫻ 104 cells/cm2), the pdsA⫺/PEC
cells migrated in large and thick groups and did not form
the characteristic thin lines of cells observed with WT cells
(Figure 2, C and D, and Supplemental Movies 1 and 2).
Moreover, the thick lines of pdsA⫺/PEC cells that did form
did not extend far beyond the micropipette tip and were
transient in nature. Together, these findings establish that
PdsA is required for cells to sense a broader range of chemoattractant and for proper streaming during chemotaxis.
PEC Alters the Streaming Behavior of WT and
pdsAⴚ/PEC Cells
We next attempted to rescue the streaming defect of pdsA⫺/
PEC cells. We plated developed cells on a glass cover chamber and added PEC isolated from PdsA/pdsA⫺ cells or PB,
gently mixed to final concentrations of between 12 ng and
5.8 ␮g protein/ml. The movement of cells was then recorded
every minute. Whereas WT cells plated with PB showed
extensive streaming after 60 min, pdsA⫺/PEC cells were
primarily in small groups or as individual cells, although
they did migrate throughout the assay. The addition of PEC
at 12 ng/ml did not alter the behavior of either WT or
pdsA⫺/PEC cells (data not shown). However, the addition of
580 ng/ml PEC remarkably altered the behavior of both cell
lines (the addition of 58 and 120 ng/ml PEC gave rise to less
robust effects). WT cells formed small clusters of only three
or four cells. In contrast, the pdsA⫺/PEC cells moved into
extended branched aggregates, reminiscent of streams (Figure 3 and Supplemental Movies 3 and 4). However, this
behavior was dependent on the amount of PEC added.
Indeed, at higher concentrations of 1.2 and 5.8 ␮g/ml,
both WT cells and pdsA⫺/PEC cells migrated without
streams and formed small aggregates (data not shown).
Together, these data show that the ability of cells to
properly relay signals and stream is tightly regulated by
the presence of PdsA.
Activation and Cellular Distribution of ACA Is Normal in
pdsAⴚ/PEC Cells
The ability of cells to activate ACA and to secrete cAMP is
essential for signal relay and streaming. To determine the
mechanism by which PdsA regulates streaming, we assessed the integrity of the ACA signaling cascade in pdsA⫺/
PEC cells. In Dictyostelium, the signaling cascade from chemoattractant receptors to ACA is highly regulated, requiring
inputs from G␤␥-subunits, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase,
cytosolic regulator of adenylyl cyclase (CRAC), and target of
rapamycin complex 2. The exogenous addition of chemoattractants to whole cells leads to a rapid burst in ACA activity
followed by a characteristic slow return to basal levels. We
found that the activation of ACA in pdsA⫺/PEC cells is
Molecular Biology of the Cell

PdsA Regulates Dictyostelium Migration

Figure 3. PdsA regulates self-aggregation. Images showing the
ability of WT and pdsA⫺/PEC cells to self-aggregate after they are
plated at high density. Cells were allowed to reach the chemotaxiscompetent stage as described in Materials and Methods, plated on a
glass chambered slide, allowed to adhere, and overlaid with either
PB or PEC diluted in PB to 580 ng protein/␮l. Images are representative of at least three independent experiment. Also see Supplemental Movies 3 (WT) and 4 (pdsA⫺/PEC).

Figure 2. pdsA⫺/PEC cells migrate to a cAMP source but exhibit
streaming defects. (A) WT and pdsA⫺/PEC cells were plated into side
wells. The center well contains [cAMP] as indicated on the left. Images
were taken 1 h after plating. Images are representative of at least four
independent experiments, each performed in triplicate. (B) Graph depicting the ability of WT and pdsA⫺/PEC cells to respond chemotactically in the under-agarose assay. The solid circles/lines represent
[cAMP] range where cells are able to respond to cAMP; open circles
represent [cAMP] that did not elicit a chemotactic response. Ranges
were determined from at least three independent experiments. (C and
D) Images of WT and pdsA⫺/PEC cells migrating to a micropipette
filled with 100 ␮M cAMP at low and high cell density, as indicated.
Images are representative of at least three independent experiments.
Also see Supplemental Movies 1 (WT) and 2 (pdsA⫺/PEC cells).
Vol. 20, July 15, 2009

similar to WT cells (Figure 4A). These findings establish that
PdsA is not required for signals to be properly transduced
from chemoattractant receptors to ACA.
Because the enrichment of ACA at the back of migrating
cells is also required for cells to migrate in a head-to-tail
manner, we transfected pdsA⫺ cells with our ACA-YFP expression plasmid (Kriebel et al., 2003) and assessed the cellular distribution of ACA during chemotaxis and streaming.
To further characterize the behavior of pdsA⫺/PEC cells, we
also monitored the distribution of the cAMP receptor cAR1GFP and CRAC-GFP, a pleckstrin homology domain-containing protein necessary for ACA activation and development, in these cells during chemotaxis. We found that, much
like in WT cells, cAR1-GFP is uniformly distributed on the
plasma membrane in polarized and migrating pdsA⫺/PEC
cells as well as in pdsA⫺ cells developed in the absence of
PEC (Figure 4B). Likewise, CRAC-GFP is redistributed
sharply to the leading edge of polarized and migrating WT
and pdsA⫺/PEC cells (Figure 4B). Finally, we also determined that ACA-YFP is highly enriched at the back of these
cells, much like in WT cells (Figure 4B). As expected, we
found that neither CRAC-GFP nor ACA-YFP exhibited a
3299

G. L. Garcia et al.

Figure 4. Activation and cellular distribution of ACA is normal in
pdsA⫺/PEC cells. (A) Graph depicting the chemoattractant-mediated activation of ACA in WT and pdsA⫺/PEC cells. Cells were
stimulated with 10 ␮M cAMP. Data are representative results from
three independent experiments, performed in duplicate. (B) Confocal fluorescent images showing the cellular distribution of ACAYFP, cAR1-GFP, or CRAC-GFP in WT, pdsA⫺/PEC, and pdsA⫺ cells
exposed to a gradient of chemoattractant. The position of the micropipette is at the top of the images. Images are representative of at
least three independent experiments.

specific redistribution in pdsA⫺ cells developed in the absence of added PEC (Figure 4B). These findings establish
that the presence of PdsA is not required for cells to adequately transduce signals to ACA. Nor is it required for
signaling molecules to be properly distributed during chemotaxis and streaming.
PdsA Localizes to the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) during
Chemotaxis
We next set out to determine the cellular distribution of
PdsA during chemotaxis. We constructed YFP fusions at
either the C or N terminus of PdsA (PdsA-YFP and YFPPdsA) and used the phenotypic rescue of cells lacking PdsA
as a readout for function of the fusion protein. Whereas the
expression of PdsA-YFP failed to rescue the developmental
defect of pdsA⫺ cells, YFP-PdsA was able to do so showing
characteristic fruiting body formation (Supplemental Figure
S3). We developed the YFP-PdsA/pdsA⫺ cells to the chemotaxis-competent stage, exposed them to a micropipette containing cAMP, and studied the cellular distribution of YFPPdsA. We found a dim YFP signal associated with densely
packed intracellular structures that did not colocalize with
mitochondria or lysosomes (Supplemental Figure S4). Unfortunately, the YFP-PdsA fusion protein was expressed at
3300

low levels making it difficult to clearly follow its distribution
in live cells. Furthermore, the expression of YFP-PdsA was
quickly lost despite constant antibiotic selection, suggesting
that the bulky YFP tag renders the protein unstable.
Because the fluorescently tagged PdsA was unstable, we
attempted to visualize the cellular distribution of the endogenous protein by using polyclonal antibodies against PdsA.
Although a few of them worked very well for Western
analyses (see Materials and Methods for details), none worked
for immunofluorescence. We therefore tagged PdsA with
the Myc epitope (MASMQKLISEED) on either the C or N
terminus of the protein. We found that both constructs
(Myc-PdsA and PdsA-Myc) rescue the developmental defect
of pdsA⫺ cells and that rescued cell lines maintained constant
expression levels. By adjusting the concentration of antibiotic during selection, we were able to control the expression
level of the Myc-tagged proteins and found that cells given
2.5 ␮g/ml G418 (G2.5) express PdsA-Myc protein at levels
similar to either WT or pdsA⫺/PEC cells (Figure 5A). Interestingly, although the antibody to PdsA was able to detect
high levels of Myc-PdsA, the Myc antibody did not strongly
detect the Myc-PdsA protein by either Western analysis or
immunofluorescence. The epitope recognized by the PdsA
antibody is nine amino acids downstream of the insertion
site of the N-terminal Myc epitope. Whether the recognition
of the Myc antibody is masked by the location of the epitope
or the recognition of the PdsA antibody is enhanced by the
Myc epitope is unclear. Because the PdsA-Myc protein was
strongly detected by the Myc antibody and expressed at a
similar level than the WT protein, we used the G2.5 PdsAMyc/pdsA⫺ cells for further immunofluorescence analyses.
To examine the cellular distribution of PdsA-Myc, we
rapidly fixed actively chemotaxing cells with 100% methanol
and processed the samples for immunostaining. As we observed for YFP-PdsA, we found the Myc signal to strongly
label densely pack intracellular structures that resemble ER
(Figure 5B). Indeed, we observed a perfect colocalization
signal when we costained with an antibody against calnexin,
an ER-specific type I transmembrane protein (MullerTaubenberger et al., 2001) (Figure 5B). Interestingly, we
found the PdsA-Myc signal to be specifically excluded from
the perinuclear ER pool. Because biochemical studies have
suggested that PdsA is associated with the plasma membrane, we set out to determine whether PdsA-Myc localized
to the plasma membrane. We used an antibody against cAR1
to visualize the plasma membrane in PdsA-Myc/pdsA⫺ cells
and looked for costaining with Myc. We found no colocalization of PdsA-Myc with the plasma membrane (Figure
5C). Although we cannot rule out that the cellular distribution we observe relies on tagged versions of PdsA, the fact
that we see a similar distribution using YFP-PdsA or PdsAMyc, and, more importantly, that both fusion proteins rescue the developmental phenotype of pdsA⫺ cells, strongly
argues against a nonspecific effect of Myc or YFP. Together,
our findings show for the first time that PdsA is closely
associated with the ER during chemotaxis. Furthermore, our
studies establish that PdsA is not associated with the plasma
membrane during chemotaxis.
DISCUSSION
In this study, we show that chemoattractant degradation is
essential for cells to optimally sense external chemical gradients. We show that cells lacking PdsA can reach the chemotaxis-competent stage by exogenously providing PdsA
during development. These pdsA⫺/PEC cells are able to
migrate directionally to an exogenous gradient of cAMP and
Molecular Biology of the Cell

PdsA Regulates Dictyostelium Migration

Figure 5. PdsA-Myc localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum. (A) Representative Western blot
showing the expression of PdsA, Myc-PdsA, or
PdsA-Myc in the supernatant of cells starved
and pulsed with cAMP for 5 h. (B and C) Confocal fluorescent images of PdsA-Myc/pdsA⫺
cells fixed and stained for Myc and calnexin (B)
or Myc and cAR1 (C). Cells were developed
with pulses of cAMP, plated on glass coverslips,
and allowed to chemotax before fixation. Images are representative of at least four independent experiments.

show normal, robust polarized F-actin assembly. As expected, we found that pdsA⫺/PEC cells migrate directionally
to a narrower range of chemoattractant concentration gradients. We reasoned that when exposed to high cAMP concentration gradients, the receptors become quickly saturated, and the cells cannot sense any difference between
their front and back. In contrast, at low cAMP concentration
gradients, the pdsA⫺/PEC cells cannot distinguish the exogenously applied stimulus from the endogenous cAMP they
produce and they do not respond chemotactically. However,
we were surprised to find that the pdsA⫺/PEC cells still
show a significant chemoattractant response range. It therefore seems that the intrinsic dynamic range of receptor activation is able to withstand wide variations in external
attractant concentrations. In contrast, we cannot rule out
that the lower cAR1 levels present in pdsA⫺/PEC cells also
Vol. 20, July 15, 2009

account for the narrower range of responsiveness observed
in these cells.
We discovered that the absence of PdsA dramatically
alters the ability of cells to migrate in groups. Using the
under-agarose assay, in which cell motion is restricted and
the diffusion of large molecules, such as PdsA, is slowed
(Johnson et al., 1996), the pdsA⫺/PEC cells migrated in a
disordered manner, showing broad twisted streams as opposed to the single-file head-to-tail arrays observed in WT
cells. In the needle assay, the external cAMP signal diffuses
from a point source forming a radial gradient convergent at
the needle. In this assay, WT cells formed clear, finely
branched streams that dominated the field of view at high
cell density. Alternatively, the migration behavior of pdsA⫺/
PEC cells showed a significant dependence on plating density. In addition, when streams formed they were not per3301

G. L. Garcia et al.

sistent and favored cells traveling parallel to each other
rather than in head-to-tail lines akin to what we observed
with the under-agarose assay. Because we found that the
absence of PdsA did not regulate the signal relay machinery
(the extent and timing of the chemoattractant-mediated activation of ACA as well as the cellular distribution of ACA
and CRAC were comparable to what is observed in WT
cells), we conclude that the streaming defect we observed is
associated with the effect of PdsA on the external cAMP
gradient field. We speculate that without degradation, a
local collection of cells produces more cAMP favoring the
formation of thick aggregates. In WT cells, locally dense cell
regions have a locally higher concentration of PdsA, making
large clusters unfavorable.
We also found that the addition of exogenous PdsA dramatically disrupts the intrinsic ability of WT cells to stream
and, most remarkably, it induced pdsA⫺/PEC cells to migrate in groups and form streams. However, the migration
behavior of the pdsA⫺/PEC cells treated with PdsA was
distinct from WT cells treated with PB. The streams in the
treated pdsA⫺/PEC cells were thicker and did not branch out
to the extent that the WT cells did. It therefore seems that the
addition of a bolus of PdsA is not optimal to induce normal
streaming and branching. Using cell fractionation, it has
been proposed that PdsA is present in both soluble and
plasma membrane-bound forms (Malchow et al., 1972; Blondelet and Brachet, 1981; Bader et al., 2007). We now show
that PdsA is not associated with the plasma membrane and
that it is found exclusively on the ER. We presume that ER
contamination in the plasma membrane fractions is responsible for the earlier findings. Because a uniform bolus of
PdsA is not sufficient to fully restore the streaming ability of
pdsA⫺/PEC cells, we envision that a controlled and perhaps
local secretion of the PdsA is involved. The secretion would
be difficult to visualize. In fixed cells, secreted PdsA will be
lost and with live cells, the YFP-PdsA is not expressed high
enough to visualize. Furthermore, biochemical assays are
not sensitive enough to detect PdsA secretion in a timely
manner (Malchow et al., 1972). Nevertheless, we envision
that coupled with the asymmetric distribution of ACA at the
back of cells, this local pool of PdsA would ultimately favor
migration in single-file lines.
Considering that the diffusion rate of cAMP is 2 orders of
magnitude faster compared with the reported hydrolysis
rate of cAMP by secreted PdsA (Gerisch, 1976; Nanjundiah
and Malchow, 1976; Bader et al., 2007), our finding that only
a soluble form of PdsA is available to degrade the cAMP
signal and that its activity affects the shape of streams is
surprising. Indeed, a computational investigation of the
cAMP gradient field produced by signal relay determined
that secreted PdsA does little to sharpen the gradient field
and assist streaming (Tang and Othmer, 1995). Conversely,
the activity of PdsA has been shown to be modulated by the
presence of an inhibitor (PDI; phosphodiesterase inhibitor)
that is expressed at different levels during development
(Gerisch et al., 1972; Franke and Kessin, 1981), and when
cells are pulsed with small amounts of cAMP (as in our
study), the expression of the inhibitor is reduced and the
activity of PdsA increases by ⬃2 orders of magnitude (Yeh et
al., 1978). Under these conditions, our hypothesis that the
secreted form of PdsA regulates cAMP gradients and group
migration is more likely.
The transition of Dictyostelium from single to group cell
behavior has been the subject of many modeling studies. In the
majority of the papers published, cAMP is proposed to be
uniformly emitted by cells in response to a cAMP signal, and
the phosphodiesterase activity is either distributed uniformly
3302

extracellularly in space and time (Levine and Reynolds, 1991;
Levine et al., 1996; Sawai et al., 2005), associated with the
plasma membrane, or both (Pate and Odell, 1981; Tang and
Othmer, 1995). Although both models are capable of reproducing many features of Dictyostelium aggregation, including the propagation of cAMP waves in characteristic spirals
and the formation of stream-like aggregates, they are not
perfect. In previous work, we have proposed that the secretion of cAMP is spatially restricted (Kriebel et al., 2003, 2008).
We now show that only the secreted form of PdsA can
degrade the external cAMP signal and that the addition of a
uniform bolus of PdsA does not lead to the formation of
highly branched, head-to-tail lines characteristic of WT
streaming. It will therefore be interesting to see how including these new parameters improves the mathematical models that describe aggregation and streaming.
Although our study clearly defines an important role for
extracellular chemoattractant degradation in the context of
Dictyostelium chemotaxis and streaming, we envision that
similar mechanisms are at play to regulate mammalian cell
chemotaxis. In leukocyte migration and inflammation, a role
for various proteases as well as internalization of bound
receptor by decoy receptors has been suggested to remove
attractant molecules and regulate chemoattractant gradients
(Borroni et al., 2008; Friedl and Weigelin, 2008; Leung et al.,
2008; Scola et al., 2008). Interestingly, the pathogenic bacteria
Pseudomonas aeruginosa seems to use degradation of proinflammatory factors to prevent host defenses from fighting
the infection (Leidal et al., 2003). In addition, Drosophila germ
cell migration is negatively regulated by two lipid phosphatases (wunen and wunen-2) that are expressed by somatic
cells. These phosphatases dephosphorylate lysophospholipids and provide repellent cues that steer the migrating cells
toward the proper environment (Renault and Lehmann,
2006). In zebrafish development, germ cell migration is guided
by the chemokine stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1). The
CXCR4 receptor on migrating cells has been shown to guide
their chemotaxis; however, mutations that control receptor internalization, and thereby signaling levels, have been shown to
affect the precision of chemotaxis (Minina et al., 2007). In
addition, CXCR7, which also binds SDF-1, is expressed in
somatic tissue and seems to influence SDF-1 gradient formation by internalizing the attractant along the migration
route (Boldajipour et al., 2008). It therefore seems that regulated attractant degradation allows a variety of cells to follow precise chemotactic path in complex environments.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Richard Kessin for providing the pdsA⫺ cells. In addition, we thank
the members of the Parent laboratory and the groups of Alan Kimmel, Tian
Jin, and Wolfgang Losert for many helpful discussions and suggestions. This
work was supported by the Intramural Research Program at the Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health and
National Institute of Standards and Technology Center for Theoretical and
Computational Materials Science grant 60NANB6D61200. E.C.R. is a recipient
of a Career Award at the Scientific Interface from the Burroughs Wellcome
fund.

REFERENCES
Aubry, L., and Firtel, R. (1999). Integration of signaling networks that regulate
Dictyostelium differentiation. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 15, 469 –517.
Bader, S., Kortholt, A., and Van Haastert, P. J. (2007). Seven Dictyostelium
discoideum phosphodiesterases degrade three pools of cAMP and cGMP.
Biochem. J. 402, 153–161.
Bagorda, A., Mihaylov, V. A., and Parent, C. A. (2006). Chemotaxis: moving
forward and holding on to the past. Thromb. Haemost. 95, 12–21.

Molecular Biology of the Cell

PdsA Regulates Dictyostelium Migration
Barra, J., Barrand, P., Blondelet, M. H., and Brachet, P. (1980). pdsA, a gene
involved in the production of active phosphodiesterase during starvation of
Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae. Mol. Gen. Genet. 177, 607– 613.
Blondelet, M. H., and Brachet, P. (1981). The hydrophobic character of the
membrane-bound phosphodiesterase from Dictyostelium discoideum. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 640, 572–582.
Boldajipour, B., Mahabaleshwar, H., Kardash, E., Reichman-Fried, M., Blaser,
H., Minina, S., Wilson, D., Xu, Q., and Raz, E. (2008). Control of chemokineguided cell migration by ligand sequestration. Cell 132, 463– 473.

Kay, R. R., Langridge, P., Traynor, D., and Hoeller, O. (2008). Changing
directions in the study of chemotaxis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 9, 455– 463.
Kolsch, V., Charest, P. G., and Firtel, R. A. (2008). The regulation of cell
motility and chemotaxis by phospholipid signaling. J. Cell Sci. 121, 551–559.
Kortholt, A., and van Haastert, P. J. (2008). Highlighting the role of Ras and
Rap during Dictyostelium chemotaxis. Cell Signal 20, 1415–1422.
Kriebel, P. W., Barr, V. A., and Parent, C. A. (2003). Adenylyl cyclase localization regulates streaming during chemotaxis. Cell 112, 549 –560.

Bolourani, P., Spiegelman, G. B., and Weeks, G. (2006). Delineation of the roles
played by RasG and RasC in cAMP-dependent signal transduction during the
early development of Dictyostelium discoideum. Mol. Biol. Cell 17, 4543– 4550.

Kriebel, P. W., Barr, V. A., Rericha, E. C., Zhang, G., and Parent, C. A. (2008).
Collective cell migration requires vesicular trafficking for chemoattractant
delivery at the trailing edge. J. Cell Biol. 183, 949 –961.

Borroni, E. M., Bonecchi, R., Buracchi, C., Savino, B., Mantovani, A., and
Locati, M. (2008). Chemokine decoy receptors: new players in reproductive
immunology. Immunol. Invest. 37, 483– 497.

Lacombe, M. L., Podgorski, G. J., Franke, J., and Kessin, R. H. (1986). Molecular cloning and developmental expression of the cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase gene of Dictyostelium discoideum. J. Biol. Chem. 261, 16811–16817.

Brown, S. S., and Rutherford, C. L. (1980). Localization of cyclic nucleotide
phosphodiesterase in the multicellular stages of Dictyostelium discoideum.
Differentiation 16, 173–183.

Leidal, K. G., Munson, K. L., Johnson, M. C., and Denning, G. M. (2003).
Metalloproteases from Pseudomonas aeruginosa degrade human RANTES,
MCP-1, and ENA-78. J. Interferon Cytokine Res. 23, 307–318.

Chisholm, R. L., and Firtel, R. A. (2004). Insights into morphogenesis from a
simple developmental system. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 5, 531–541.

Leung, L. L., Myles, T., Nishimura, T., Song, J. J., and Robinson, W. H. (2008).
Regulation of tissue inflammation by thrombin-activatable carboxypeptidase
B (or TAFI). Mol. Immunol. 45, 4080 – 4083.

Comer, F. I., Lippincott, C. K., Masbad, J. J., and Parent, C. A. (2005). The
PI3K-mediated activation of CRAC independently regulates adenylyl cyclase
activation and chemotaxis. Curr. Biol. 15, 134 –139.
Comer, F. I., and Parent, C. A. (2006). Phosphoinositide 3-kinase activity
controls the chemoattractant-mediated activation and adaptation of adenylyl
cyclase. Mol. Biol. Cell 17, 357–366.
Darmon, M., Barra, J., and Brachet, P. (1978). The role of phosphodiesterase in
aggregation of Dictyostelium discoideum. J. Cell Sci. 31, 233–243.
Devreotes, P. N. (1994). G protein-linked signaling pathways control the
developmental program of Dictyostelium. Neuron 12, 235–241.
Faure, M., Podgorski, G. J., Franke, J., and Kessin, R. H. (1988). Disruption of
Dictyostelium discoideum morphogenesis by overproduction of cAMP phosphodiesterase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85, 8076 – 8080.
Faure, M., Podgorski, G. J., Franke, J., and Kessin, R. H. (1989). Rescue of a
Dictyostelium discoideum mutant defective in cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase. Dev. Biol. 131, 366 –372.
Franke, J., and Kessin, R. H. (1981). The cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase
inhibitory protein of Dictyostelium discoideum. Purification and characterization. J. Biol. Chem. 256, 7628 –7637.
Franke, J., and Kessin, R. H. (1992). The cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases
of Dictyostelium discoideum: molecular genetics and biochemistry. Cell Signal.
4, 471– 478.
Friedl, P., and Weigelin, B. (2008). Interstitial leukocyte migration and immune function. Nat. Immunol. 9, 960 –969.
Garcia, G. L., and Parent, C. A. (2008). Signal relay during chemotaxis. J.
Microsc. 231, 529 –534.
Gerisch, G. (1976). Extracellular cyclic-amp phosphodiesterase regulation in
agar plate cultures of Dictyostelium discoideum. Cell Differ. 5, 21–25.
Gerisch, G., Malchow, D., Riedel, V., Muller, E., and Every, M. (1972). Cyclic
AMP phosphodiesterase and its inhibitor in slime mould development. Nat.
New Biol. 235, 90 –92.
Hereld, D., Vaughan, R., Kim, J. Y., Borleis, J., and Devreotes, P. (1994).
Localization of ligand-induced phosphorylation sites to serine clusters in the
C-terminal domain of the Dictyostelium cAMP receptor, cAR1. J. Biol. Chem.
269, 7036 –7044.
Insall, R., and Andrew, N. (2007). Chemotaxis in Dictyostelium: how to walk
straight using parallel pathways. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 10, 578 –581.
Insall, R., Kuspa, A., Lilly, P. J., Shaulsky, G., Levin, L. R., Loomis, W. F.,
and Devreotes, P. (1994). CRAC, a cytosolic protein containing a pleckstrin
homology domain, is required for receptor and G protein-mediated activation
of adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium. J. Cell Biol. 126, 1537–1545.
Janetopoulos, C., and Firtel, R. A. (2008). Directional sensing during chemotaxis. FEBS Lett. 582, 2075–2085.
Janetopoulos, C., Jin, T., and Devreotes, P. (2001). Receptor-mediated activation of heterotrimeric G-proteins in living cells. Science 291, 2408 –2411.
Johnson, E. M., Berk, D. A., Jain, R. K., and Deen, W. M. (1996). Hindered
diffusion in agarose gels: test of effective medium model. Biophys. J. 70,
1017–1023.
Johnson, R. L., Vaughan, R. A., Caterina, M. J., Van Haastert, P. J., and
Devreotes, P. N. (1991). Overexpression of the cAMP receptor 1 in growing
Dictyostelium cells. Biochemistry 30, 6982– 6986.

Vol. 20, July 15, 2009

Levine, H., Aranson, I., Tsimring, L., and Truong, T. V. (1996). Positive genetic
feedback governs cAMP spiral wave formation in Dictyostelium. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 93, 6382– 6386.
Levine, H., and Reynolds, W. (1991). Streaming instability of aggregating
slime mold amoebae. Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 2400 –2403.
Mahadeo, D. C., and Parent, C. A. (2006). Signal relay during the life cycle of
Dictyostelium. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 73, 115–140.
Malchow, D., Nagele, B., Schwartz, H., and Gerisch, G. (1972). Membranebound cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase in chemotactically responding cells of
Dictyostelium discoideum. Eur. J. Biochem. 28, 136 –142.
Manahan, C. L., Iglesias, P. A., Long, Y., and Devreotes, P. N. (2004). Chemoattractant signaling in Dictyostelium discoideum. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.
20, 223–253.
McMains, V. C., Liao, X. H., and Kimmel, A. R. (2008). Oscillatory signaling
and network responses during the development of Dictyostelium discoideum.
Ageing Res. Rev. 7, 234 –248.
Minina, S., Reichman-Fried, M., and Raz, E. (2007). Control of receptor internalization, signaling level, and precise arrival at the target in guided cell
migration. Curr. Biol. 17, 1164 –1172.
Muller-Taubenberger, A., Lupas, A. N., Li, H. W., Ecke, M., Simmeth, E., and
Gerisch, G. (2001). Calreticulin and calnexin in the endoplasmic reticulum are
important for phagocytosis. EMBO J. 20, 6772– 6782.
Nanjundiah, V., and Malchow, D. (1976). A theoretical study of the effects of
cyclic AMP phosphodiesterases during aggregation in Dictyostelium. J. Cell
Sci. 22, 49 –58.
Orlow, S. J., Shapiro, I., Franke, J., and Kessin, R. H. (1981). The extracellular
cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase of Dictyostelium discoideum. Purification
and characterization. J. Biol. Chem. 256, 7620 –7627.
Pang, K. M., Lynes, M. A., and Knecht, D. A. (1999). Variables controlling the
expression level of exogenous genes in Dictyostelium. Plasmid 41, 187–197.
Parent, C. A., Blacklock, B. J., Froehlich, W. M., Murphy, D. B., and Devreotes,
P. N. (1998). G protein signaling events are activated at the leading edge of
chemotactic cells. Cell 95, 81–91.
Parent, C. A., and Devreotes, P. N. (1995). Isolation of inactive and G proteinresistant adenylyl cyclase mutants using random mutagenesis. J. Biol. Chem.
270, 22693–22696.
Parent, C. A., and Devreotes, P. N. (1996). Molecular genetics of signal
transduction in Dictyostelium. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65, 411– 440.
Pate, E. F., and Odell, G. M. (1981). A computer simulation of chemical
signaling during the aggregation phase of Dictyostelium discoideum. J. Theor.
Biol. 88, 201–239.
Pitt, G. S., Milona, N., Borleis, J., Lin, K. C., Reed, R. R., and Devreotes, P. N.
(1992). Structurally distinct and stage-specific adenylyl cyclase genes play
different roles in Dictyostelium development. Cell 69, 305–315.
Renault, A. D., and Lehmann, R. (2006). Follow the fatty brick road: lipid
signaling in cell migration. Curr. Opin. Genet Dev. 16, 348 –354.
Sambrook, J. (2001). Molecular Cloning: A laboratory Manual, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

3303

G. L. Garcia et al.
Saran, S., Meima, M. E., Alvarez-Curto, E., Weening, K. E., Rozen, D. E., and
Schaap, P. (2002). cAMP signaling in Dictyostelium— complexity of cAMP
synthesis, degradation and detection. J. Muscle Res. Cell Motil. 23, 793– 802.
Sawai, S., Thomason, P. A., and Cox, E. C. (2005). An autoregulatory circuit
for long-range self-organization in Dictyostelium cell populations. Nature 433,
323–326.

Tang, Y., and Othmer, H. G. (1995). Excitation, oscillations and wave propagation in a G-protein-based model of signal transduction in Dictyostelium
discoideum. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 349, 179 –195.
Urushihara, H. (2008). Developmental biology of the social amoeba: history,
current knowledge and prospects. Dev Growth Differ 50 (suppl 1), S277–S281.
van Haastert, P.J.M., and Devreotes, P. N. (2004). Chemotaxis: signalling the
way forward. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 5, 626 – 634.

Scola, A. M., Johswich, K. O., Morgan, B. P., Klos, A., and Monk, P. N. (2008).
The human complement fragment receptor, C5L2, is a recycling decoy receptor. Mol. Immunol. 46, 1149 –1162.

Van Lint, P., and Libert, C. (2007). Chemokine and cytokine processing by
matrix metalloproteinases and its effect on leukocyte migration and inflammation. J. Leukoc. Biol. 82, 1375–1381.

Stephens, L., Milne, L., and Hawkins, P. (2008). Moving towards a better
understanding of chemotaxis. Curr. Biol. 18, R485–R494.

Weeks, G. (2000). Signalling molecules involved in cellular differentiation
during Dictyostelium morphogenesis. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 3, 625– 630.

Sucgang, R., Weijer, C. J., Siegert, F., Franke, J., and Kessin, R. H. (1997). Null
mutations of the Dictyostelium cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase gene block
chemotactic cell movement in developing aggregates. Dev. Biol. 192, 181–192.
Sussmann, M. (1966). Biochemical and genetic methods in the study of cellular slime mold development. In: Methods in Cell Physiology, vol. 2, ed. D.
Prescott, New York: Academic Press, 397– 410.

3304

Yamasaki, F., and Hayashi, H. (1982). Comparison of properties of the cellular
and extracellular phosphodiesterases induced by cyclic adenosine 3⬘,5⬘-monophosphate in Dictyostelium discoideum. J. Biochem. 91, 981–988.
Yeh, R. P., Chan, F. K., and Coukell, M. B. (1978). Independent regulation of
the extracellular cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase-inhibitor system and membrane differentiation by exogenous cyclic AMP in Dictyostelium discoideum.
Dev. Biol. 66, 361–374.

Molecular Biology of the Cell

