Daniel T. Gillespie

2340

Exact Stochastic Simulation of Coupled Chemical Reactions
Daniel T. Gillespie*
Research Department, Naval Weapons Center, China Lake, California 93555 (Received May 12, 1977)
Publication costs assisted by the Naval Weapons Center

I. Introduction
In this paper we shall be concerned with the following
general problem: If a fixed volume V contains a spatially
uniform mixture of N chemical species which can interreact through M specified chemical reaction channels, then
given the numbers of molecules of each species present at
some initial time, what will these molecular population
levels be at any later time?
The traditional way of treating this problem begins by
translating it into the mathematical language of ordinary
differential equations. More specifically, if we assume that
the number of molecules of the ith species in V at time
t can be represented by a continuous, single-valued
function X;(f) (i = 1,.. .,N), and if we further assume that
each of the M chemical reactions can be regarded as a
continuous rate process, then we can easily construct a set
of coupled, first-order, ordinary differential equations of
the form

dx1/dt

=

dX2/dt

=

dXN/dt

f1(xl„. m
f2(Xu. -Xn)
.

=

(1)

fN(Xu. .Xn)
.

The specific forms of the functions f; on the right (which
are usually nonlinear in the X;’s) are determined by the
structures and rate constants of the M chemical reaction
channels. These equations are called the “reaction-rate
equations”; solving them for the functions X^fc),.. .,XlV(f),
subject to the prescribed initial conditions, is tantamount
to solving the time-evolution problem posed earlier.
Analytical solutions to the reaction-rate equations can be
found only for rather simple systems, so it is usually
necessary to solve these equations numerically on a
computer. As is evident from many of the papers in this
symposium series, the art of reliably solving reaction-rate
equations on a computer has been developed to an impressive and sophisticated level.
* Address
correspondence to the author at Code 3821, Naval
Weapons Center, China Lake, Calif. 93555.

The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

Although the great importance and usefulness of the
differential reaction-rate equations approach to chemical
kinetics cannot be denied, we should not lose sight of the
fact that the physical basis for this approach leaves
something to be desired. This approach evidently assumes

that the time evolution of a chemically reacting system is
both continuous and deterministic. However, the time
evolution of a chemically reacting system is not a continuous process, because molecular population levels

obviously can change only by discrete integer amounts.
Moreover, the time evolution is not a deterministic process
either. For, even if we put aside quantum considerations
and regard the molecular motions to be governed by the
equations of classical mechanics, it is impossible even in
principle to predict the exact molecular population levels
at some future time unless we take account of the precise
positions and velocities of all the molecules in the system.
In other words, although the temporal behavior of a
chemically reacting system of classical molecules is a
deterministic process in the full position-momentum phase
space of the system, it is not a deterministic process in the
IV-dimensional subspace of the species population numbers, as (1) implies.
In many cases of course the time evolution of a
chemically reacting system can, to a very acceptable degree
of accuracy, be treated as a continuous, deterministic
process. However this should not always be taken for
granted, especially now that the attention of chemical
kineticists is increasingly being drawn to the study of
ecological systems, microscopic biological systems, and
nonlinear systems driven to conditions of chemical instability. In some cases like these, the inability of the
reaction-rate equations to describe the fluctuations in the
molecular population levels can be a serious shortcoming.
Moreover, contrary to widespread belief, it is not even
guaranteed that the reaction-rate equations will provide
a sufficiently accurate account of the average molecular
population levels; for, except for very simple linear systems,
the average molecular population levels will not exactly
satisfy any closed system of equations such as (1).

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

There are two formalisms for mathematically describing the time behavior of a spatially homogeneous chemical
system: The deterministic approach regards the time evolution as a continuous, wholly predictable process
which is governed by a set of coupled, ordinary differential equations (the “reaction-rate equations”); the stochastic
approach regards the time evolution as a kind of random-walk process which is governed by a single differential-difference equation (the “master equation”). Fairly simple kinetic theory arguments show that the
stochastic formulation of chemical kinetics has a firmer physical basis than the deterministic formulation, but
unfortunately the stochastic master equation is often mathematically intractable. There is, however, a way
to make exact numerical calculations within the framework of the stochastic formulation without having to
deal with the master equation directly. It is a relatively simple digital computer algorithm which uses a rigorously
derived Monte Carlo procedure to numerically simulate the time evolution of the given chemical system. Like
the master equation, this “stochastic simulation algorithm” correctly accounts for the inherent fluctuations
and correlations that are necessarily ignored in the deterministic formulation. In addition, unlike most procedures
for numerically solving the deterministic reaction-rate equations, this algorithm never approximates infinitesimal
time increments df by finite time steps At. The feasibility and utility of the simulation algorithm are demonstrated
by applying it to several well-known model chemical systems, including the Lotka model, the Brusselator, and
the Oregonator.

Stochastic Simulation of Coupled Chemical Reactions

2341

Figure 1. The "collision volume" 5 l/con which molecule 1 will sweep
out relative to molecule 2 in the next small time interval 5f.

Many chemical kineticists would probably argue that
these considerations are rather academic, because despite

Figure 2. Schematic of the stochastic simulation algorithm.

II. Physical Basis of the Stochastic Formulation
of Chemical Kinetics
In general, a chemical reaction occurs whenever two or
molecules of appropriate kinds collide in an appropriate way. The “stochastic formulation” of chemical
kinetics is simply a consequence of taking seriously the fact
that collisions in a system of molecules in thermal equiIn this
librium occur in an essentially random manner.
section we want to sketch briefly how this intuitive notion
can be expressed in a more precise, quantitative way; a
more detailed treatment may be found in ref 1.
IIA. Molecular Collisions. Consider a system composed
of a mixture of two gas-phase molecular species, Si and
S2, in thermal (but not necessarily chemical) equilibrium
inside some volume V. For simplicity, let us assume that
the Si and S2 molecules are hard spheres of radii rt and
r2, respectively. Then a 1-2 collision will occur whenever
more

molecule and
the center-to-center distance between an
an S2 molecule decreases to r12 = /q + r2. Let us try to
calculate the rate at which such collisions are occurring
in V. Following traditional textbook derivations of the
molecular collision rate, we begin by picking an arbitrary
1-2 molecular pair, and denoting by
the speed of
molecule 1 relative to molecule 2. We then observe that,
in the next small time interval fit, molecule 1 will sweep
=
out relative to molecule 2 a “collision volume”
(see Figure 1), in the sense that if the center
7rri22"Lli2
of molecule 2 happens to lie inside 6Vcou at time t, then
the two molecules will collide in the time interval (t, t +
5t).
The usual procedure now would be to estimate the
number of S2 molecules whose centers lie inside fiVC0]i,

Figure 3. The one-standard deviation envelope (dashed) and twostandard deviation envelope (solid) as calculated from the master
equation, superimposed on the results Of one stochastic simulation run
(dots), of the simple isomerization reaction (22) with c = 0.5 and X0
=
1000. The simulation run is plotted at 1 rpd (reactions per dot).

divide that number by 5t, and then take the limit fit
0
to obtain the rate at which the Si molecule is colliding with
S2 molecules. However, this procedure suffers from an
embarassing difficulty: As 5Vcon -* 0, the number of S2
molecules whose centers lie inside fiVcou will be either 1 or
0, with the latter possibility becoming more and more likely
as the limiting process proceeds. Strictly speaking, then,
it is physically meaningless to talk about “the number of
molecules whose centers lie inside fiVcou” in the required
limit, of vanishingly small fit.
Instead of following the usual practice of overriding this
difficulty with nonrigorous “averaging" arguments, let us
redirect our inquiry in the following way: Since the system
is in thermal equilibrium, the molecules will at all times
be distributed randomly and uniformly throughout the
containing volume V. Therefore, the probability that the
center of an arbitrary S2 molecule will be found inside fi VTcon
at time t will be given by the simple ratio 5Vcoll/V;
moreover, this is true even in the limit of vanishingly small
h V'c(,n.
If we now average this ratio over the velocity
distributions of the Sj and S2 molecules, we may conclude
—*

The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

whatever shortcomings the differential reaction-rate
equations may have, they seem to provide the only
practical means for numerically analyzing the time behavior of nontrivial chemical systems. However, in a recent
paper by this writer,1 a new computational method was
developed from premises which take explicit account of
the fact that the time evolution of a spatially homogeneous
chemical system is a discrete, stochastic process instead
of a continuous, deterministic process. This new computational method, which we shall refer to as the
“stochastic simulation algorithm”, now offers an alternative
to the differential reaction-rate equations—an alternative
that is free of the difficulties mentioned above.
In sections II and III of this paper, we shall describe the
stochastic simulation algorithm and give a brief synopsis
of the arguments used in ref 1 to derive it. Then, in section
IV, we shall exhibit for the first time some actual numerical
results that have been obtained in applying the algorithm
to some well-known model chemical systems. Our purpose
in section IV will be not so much to shed new light on the
models treated as to illustrate in a convincing way the
feasibility and utility of our new computational method.

2342

Daniel T. Gillespie

Figure 6. A 10 rpd plot of two stochastic simulation runs for reactions
29, with c,X = 5 and c2 = 0.005, corresponding to the deterministic
steady state Y = 1000; one run starts at Y = 10, and the other run
starts at Y = 3000.

of the colliding molecules), one finds in a similar way that
chemical reactions are more properly characterized by a
“reaction probability per unit time” instead of a “reaction
rate”. Thus, suppose the Sx and S2 molecules in V can
undergo the reaction

R,;
S, + S2 -* 2St
(3a)
Then in direct analogy with (2a), we may assert the existence of a constant cx, which depends only on the physical
properties of the two molecules and the temperature of the
system, such that
cy df = average probability that a particular 1-2

Figure 5. Same as Figure 3, except X0
at 10 rpd.

=

10000 and the run is plotted

that
SVeou/y
=

=

V-'vr^St

average probability that a particular 1-2

molecular pair will collide in the next
vanishingly small time interval 6f
(2a)
For Maxwellian velocity distributions the average relative
speed V12 will be equal to (SkT/irm^)1^2, where k is
Boltzmann’s constant, T the absolute temperature, and
m12 the reduced mass m1m2/(m1 + m2). In any case, if we
are given that at time t there are in VX2 of the Si molecules and X2 of the S2 molecules, making a total of XiX2
distinct 1-2 molecular pairs, then it follows from (2a) that2

XlX2V~1nrl22vl2 df

=

probability that a 1-2
collision will occur somewhere inside V in the next
infinitesimal time interval
(2b)
(t, t + df)

We see then that, although we cannot rigorously calculate the number of 1-2 collisions occurring in V in any
infinitesimal time interval, we can rigorously calculate the
probability of a 1-2 collision occurring in V in any infinitesimal time interval. This means that we really ought
to characterize a system of thermally equilibrized molecules by a “collision probability per unit time”—namely,
the coefficient of df in (2b)—instead of by a “collision
rate”. This is why these collisions constitute a stochastic
Markov process instead of a deterministic rate process.
IIB. The Stochastic Reaction Constant c„. If one
applies the foregoing arguments specifically to reactive
collisions (i.e., collisions which result in chemical alterations
The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

molecular pair will react according to Rj
in the next infinitesimal time interval df
(3b)
This implies that, if at time t there are in VX1 of the Sj
molecules and X2 of the S2 molecules, making a total of
X±X2 distinct 1-2 pairs, then2
X\X2C\ df probability that an Rj, reaction will
occur somewhere inside V in the next
infinitesimal time interval (f, f + df)
(3c)
=

More generally, suppose the volume V contains a
spatially homogeneous (or thermally equilibrized) mixture
of X* molecules of chemical species S, (i = 1,.. ,,N), and
suppose further that these N species can interreact through
M specified chemical reaction channels RM (a = 1.....M).
Then we may assert the existence of M constants c„ (/u =
1,.. .,M), which depend only on the physical properties of
the molecules and the temperature of the system, such that
cM

df

=

average probability that a particular

combination of RM reactant molecules will
react accordingly in the next infinitesimal
time interval df
(4)

By “average” here we mean simply that, if we multiply
df by the total number of distinct combinations of R„
reactant molecules in V at time f, we will obtain the
probability that an RM reaction will occur somewhere inside
V in the next infinitesimal time interval (f, t + df).
Equation 4 may be regarded both as the definition of
the stochastic reaction constant cM, and also as the fundamental hypothesis of the stochastic formulation of
chemical kinetics. As is shown by more detailed arguments
in ref 1, we may expect this hypothesis to be valid for any
molecular system that is kept “well-mixed”, either by

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

Figure 4. Same as Figure 3, except X0 = 5000 and the run is plotted
at 5 rpd.

2343

Stochastic Simulation of Coupled Chemical Reactions

factor will be 3! = 6.
We see then that, from a practical numerical point of
will differ at most by only two simple
view, cM and
constant factors. From a theoretical point of view,
is much more
however, the difference between cM and
complicated, and relates ultimately to the conceptual
differences that exist between the stochastic and deterministic approaches to chemical kinetics.

III. Calculating the Stochastic Time Evolution of
a Chemically Reacting System

direct stirring, or else by simply requiring that nonreactive
molecular collisions occur much more frequently than
reactive molecular collisions. In section III we shall take
up the problem of how to use (4) to actually calculate the
time evolution of such a system.
IIC. Connection with the Deterministic Reaction-Rate
Constant kIntuition suggests that the stochastic reaction
constant should be closely related to the more familiar
reaction-rate constant k^, which forms the basis for the
deterministic approach to chemical kinetics. For the
particular reaction Rt in (3a), it turns out that1

(5a)

ky = VCy(XyX2)/(Xy)(X2)

where the angular brackets denote an average over an
ensemble of identical systems. However, in the deterministic formulation of chemical kinetics, no distinction
is made between the average of a product and the product
of the averages. Therefore, to the extent that the deterministic formulation is adequate, we have (XyX2)
{Xy}(X2), and (5a) simplifies to
—

chemically reacting system is to set up and solve a so-called
“master equation” for the system. A good review of the
master equation approach to chemical kinetics has been
given by McQuarrie.3 Here we would merely like to
summarize briefly the main features of the master equation
formalism in order to provide a conceptual setting for our
subsequent presentation of the stochastic simulation
approach. It should be emphasized, though, that the
master equation itself plays no role whatsoever in either
the derivation or the implementation of the stochastic

simulation algorithm.
The key element of the master equation formalism is
the “grand probability function”

P(Xy,X2,.

ky=VCy

(5b)
The presence of the factor V is merely a consequence of
the fact that the reaction-rate constant is normally used
in differential equations that contain molecular concentrations (numbers of molecules per unit volume) rather
than total numbers of molecules. If reaction Rx had three
reactant molecules instead of two, we would have V2 instead of V; if Rj had only one reactant molecule (a simple
isomerization), the factor V would be absent.
Aside from possible factors of V, there is one other
practical difference between and that can arise. To
see this, consider the reverse of the reaction Ri in (3a):
2S,

R2:

S, + S2

(6a)

Following (4), we would characterize this reaction by a
constant c2, such that c2 dt is the average probability that
a particular pair of Si molecules will react according to R2
in the next dt. However, the number of distinct pairs of
Sx molecules in V is not XyXy but Xy(Xy
l)/2!. Hence,
the probability that an R2 reaction will occur somewhere
inside V in the next time interval dt is 1/2X1(X1 l)c2 dt.
This leads to the result that
-

-

k2 = VC2C/2Xy(Xy

-

l))/(Xy)(Xy)

=

VC2/2

(6b)

in contrast to eq 5. In general, if Rw has two identical
reactant molecules then cM will be larger than ku by a factor
of 2! 2; if RM has three identical reactant molecules, this
=

.

.,XN\ t) = probability that there will
be in V at time t Xy
molecules of species Si, and
X2 molecules of species
S2>. ., and XN molecules of
species Sjv
(7)
.

A knowledge of this function would evidently provide a
fairly complete characterization of the “stochastic state”
of the system at time t. Thus, for example, the kth
moment of P with respect to Xy
OO

Xtw(t)
(i

=

2
x,=o

OO

2 XykP{Xy,. ..,XN;t)
xN o
1.....JV; k = 0,1, 2,. .)

=

=

.

(8)

gives the “average (number)* of S, molecules in V at time
t”. By “average” here we mean an average taken over
many repeated “runs” from time 0 to time t of the stochastic process defined by (4), each run having the same
initial numbers of molecules.4 The number Xt of S,
molecules found at time t will vary from run to run, but
the average of the feth power of these numbers will approach Xfk\t) in the limit of infinitely many runs. Especially useful are the k = 1 and k = 2 moments; this is
because X,(1)(£) and

A i(t)= {X^(t)-[X^(t)]2}1/2

(9)

measure, respectively, the average number of S; molecules
The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

Figure 7. A 40 rpd plot of two stochastic simulation runs for reactions
29, with c,X = 5 and c2 = 0.00125, corresponding to the deterministic
steady state Y = 4000; one run starts at Y = 40, and the other run
starts at Y = 12000.

The temporal behavior of a spatially homogeneous
mixture of N molecular species interreacting through M
chemical reaction channels is governed solely by the
fundamental hypothesis (4). However, it is not at all
obvious just how we should go about using (4) to calculate
this temporal behavior. In this section we shall outline two
different ways of approaching this problem—the traditional “master equation” approach, and the new
“stochastic simulation” approach. Although their strategies are quite different, it is important to keep in mind
that these two approaches are nevertheless equivalent in
the sense that both are rigorous consequences of the
fundamental hypothesis (4).
IIIA. The Master Equation Approach. The traditional
method of calculating the stochastic time evolution of a

2344

Daniel T. Gillespie

in V at time t, and the magnitude of the root-mean-square
fluctuations that occur about this average. In other words,
we may “reasonably expect” to find between
[XP\t) A,(f)] and [X^(t)+At(t)]
(10)
-

molecules of S* in V in time t. The functions X;(£) appearing in the deterministic reaction-rate equations (1)
usually approximate the first moments X((1)(t) fairly
closely, but only rarely is there exact equality.

.

.

ll aM dt] +

| £ dt

g=l
Here we have, defined the quantities a„ by
M=1

ag dt

=

=

(11)

dt X {number of distinct RM molecular
combinations in the state
(Xlt. .,XN)}
probability that an RM reaction will occur
in V in (t, t + dt), given that the system is
in the state (Xu. .,XN) at time t
(12)
cM

.

Thus, the first term in (10) is the probability that the
system will be in the state (Xlv. ,,XiV) at time t, and then
remains in that state (i.e., undergoes no reactions) in (f,
t + dt). The quantity PM dt gives the probability that the
system is one RM reaction removed from the state (X1(.
,,XN) at time t, and then undergoes an R„ reaction in (t,
t + dt). Thus, £m will be the product of P evaluated at the
appropriate once-removed state at t, times cM, times the
number of R„ molecular reactant combinations available
in that once-removed state. Without going into any further
details, it is sufficient here to simply observe that (11) leads
.

directly to the “master equation”
2 [PM
|-P(X1,...,XN;t)=
or
n=i

-

aMP(Xi.....XN;t)](13)

In any particular case, the master equation is fairly easy
to write; however, solving it is quite another matter. The
number of problems for which the master equation (13)
can be solved analytically is even fewer than the number
of problems for which the deterministic reaction-rate
equations (1) can be solved analytically. In addition, unlike
the reaction-rate equations, the master equation does not
readily lend itself to numerical solution on a digital
computer, owing to the number and nature of its independent variables.6 Attempts to use the master equation
to construct tractable time-evolution equations for the
moments, and in particular X;(1)(f) and A;(t), are also
usually unsuccessful; for it turns out that, unless all the
reactions R„ are simple monomolecular reactions, the
equations for the time derivative of any moment will
always involve higher order moments, thus rendering the
set of moment equations infinitely open ended.
In short, although the master equation is both exact and
elegant, it is usually not very useful for making practical
numerical calculations.
IIIB. The Reaction Probability Density Function. Let
us now put aside the master equation formalism, and
consider instead how we might go about simulating the
stochastic time evolution of a chemically reacting system.
If we are given that the system is in the state (Xlv. .,Xn)
The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

“probabilistic” sense.
Prompted by these considerations, we introduce the
function P(r, g) defined by1
P(r, g) dr probability that, given the state
(Xlv. .,Xjv) at time t, the next reaction in V will occur in the infinitesimal time interval (t + r, £ + r +
dr), and will be an RM reaction
(14)
We call P(r, g) the “reaction probability density function”,
because in mathematical terminology it is a joint probability density function on the space of the continuous
variable r (0 < r < °°) and the discrete variable g (g 1,
2,.. ,,M). Notice that the variables r and g are quantities
=

=

whose respective values would give us answers to the two
questions mentioned above. Our first step toward finding
a legitimate method for assigning numerical values to r and
g is to derive, from the fundamental hypothesis (4), an
analytical expression for P(r, g).
To this end, we begin by defining for each reaction R„
a function

according to

number of distinct RM molecular reactant
h^
combinations available in the state
(*i,X3,...,Xw) (p = l ,...,M)
(15)
then
will
we
Thus, if R„ has the form Si + S2
anything,
have
XiX2; if RM has the form 2Sj anything, then
we will have h„
1/2Xi(X1 1). In general, will be some
combinatorial function of the variables Xh X2,.. .,XN. With
so defined, then (4) implies that [cf. (12)]
probability that an RM reaM dt
)iMcM df
action will occur in V in (£, t +
dt), given that the system is in
the state (X!,.. .,X_V) at time
t (jj. 1,...,M)
(16)
=

-*

=

—-

=

-

=

=

=

We now calculate the probability in (14) as the product
of: Po(t), the probability that, given the state (X2.....XN)
at time t, no reaction will occur in the time interval it, t
+ r); times a„ dr, the subsequent probability that an R„
reaction will occur in the time interval (£ + r, £ + r + dr):5

P(r, g) dr Po(7-)-aM dr
(17a)
To find an expression for P0(r), we first note that [1 2„a„
dr'] is the probability that no reaction will occur in time
dr' from the state (Xi,...,XN). Therefore
=

-

M

P0(r'+ dr')

2 a, dr']
P0(r')-[1- V=1

=

(17b)

from which it is readily deduced that
M

P0(r)= exp[-2
a„r]
V~\

(17c)

Inserting (17c) into (17a), we conclude that the reaction
probability density function defined in (14) is given by7
if 0 < r < and
( aM exp(-a0r)
P (r,g)=
1 ,...,M
g
(18)
j
( 0
otherwise
-

=

where
ag

=

(g

hgcg

=

l,...,M)

(19a)

and
M
C5

III

M
M

,

i

=

1

=

,

2 hvcv
=

l

(19b)

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

The master equation is simply the time-evolution
equation for the function P{Xi.....XN; t). It may be derived from (4) by using the addition and multiplication
laws of probability theory to write P(Xh.. .,XN; t + dt) as
the sum of the probabilities of the 1 + M different ways
in which the system can arrive at the state (X1(.. .,Xjv) at
time t + dt:5
P(Xlv .JCN;t + dt) = P(X1,. .,XN-, mi-

at time t, then essentially all we need in order to “move
the system forward in time” are the answers to two
questions: when will the next reaction occur, and what
kind of reaction will it bel Because of the stochastic
nature of the reactions, though, we may expect that these
two questions will be answerable only in some

Stochastic Simulation of Coupled Chemical Reactions

2345

-

=

(0

otherwise

then we could simply generate two random numbers r2 and
r2 using a unit-interval uniform random number generator
and take
r =

J*i

g

r2

=

(20b)

However, our objective here is to generate a random pair
(r, g) according to the probability density function in (18),
not the probability density function in (20a). As it
happens, there exists a mathematically rigorous procedure
for taking two random numbers r2 and r2 from the unitinterval uniform distribution, and constructing from them
a random pair (r, g) from a set described by any specified
pair probability density function.9 For the pair probability
density function in (20a), this construction procedure turns
out to be precisely (20b); for the pair probability density
function P(r, g) in (18), the construction procedure turns
out to be as follows:
With r2 and r2 two random numbers from the unitinterval uniform distribution, take
t=

(l/o0)ln (1/rO

(21a)

and take g to be that integer for which

2 av < r2a0 <

V=\

2 av

V=1

(21b)

A rigorous proof of the fact that the pair (r, g) constructed

according eq 21 may be regarded as having been drawn
from the set of random pairs whose probability density
function is P(t, g) in (18) may be found in section VA of
ref 1. Suffice it here to say that (21a) generates a random
number r according to the probability density function
Pi(t) = a0 exp(-a0r), while (21b) generates a random
integer g. according to the probability density function
P2(g) = aja0, and the stated result follows, roughly
=
P(r, g).
speaking, because
The generating procedure (21) is easy to code in Fortran.
In particular, (21b) may be implemented simply by cumulatively adding the successive values au a2)... in a
do-loop until their sum is observed to equal or exceed r2a0,
whereupon g is set equal to the index of the last av term
added.
Our algorithm for simulating the stochastic time evolution of a chemically reacting system should now be rather
obvious (see Figure 2):
Step 0 (Initialization). Input the desired values for the
M reaction constants ch.. .,cM and the N initial molecular
population numbers Xh.. ,,XN. Set the time variable t and
the reaction counter n both to zero. Initialize the unitinterval uniform random number generator (URN).
Step 1. Calculate and store the M quantities a2 =
hiCi,...,aM = hMCMfor the current molecular population
numbers, where h„ is that function of Xu.. ,,Xjv defined
in (15). Also calculate and store as a0 the sum of the M
av values.

Step 2. Generate two random numbers r2 and r2 using
the unit-interval uniform random number generator, and
calculate r and g according to (21a) and (21b).
Step 3. Using the r and g values obtained in step 2,
increase t by r, and adjust the molecular population levels
to reflect the occurrence of one RM reaction; e.g., if RM is
the reaction in (3a), then increase Xj by 1 and decrease
X2 by 1. Then increase the reaction counter n by 1 and
return to step 1.
In returning to step 1 from step 3, notice that it is
necessary to recalculate only those quantities a„ corresponding to reactions R„ whose reactant population levels
were just altered in step 3; also, a0 may be recalculated
simply by adding to a0 the difference between each newly
changed a„ value and its corresponding old value.
Of course, somewhere in the 1-2-3 loop one will want
to provide for writing out or plotting the (Xx.....XN, t)
values at'regular intervals of either t or n. Also, one will
want to make provisions for halting the calculations when
either t or n reaches some predetermined value, or if a0
should ever reach zero.
If it is desired to estimate any of the moments Xfk)(t)
of the grand probability function (see eq 8-10), then it will
be necessary to make several simulation runs from time
0 to the chosen time t, all identical with each other except
for the initialization of the random number generator in
step 0. Any moment X,-(,i)(t)
(X/*)f may then be estimated directly as the average of the fcth power of the
numbers found for X, at time t in these runs. In a similar
way, one can estimate various cross-correlation functions
such as (XjX;)t (X;)t{Xj)t, etc. The number of runs
necessary to obtain adequate statistics in these estimates
will vary with the situation.
HID. Remarks. After the simulation algorithm described above had been developed, several earlier simulation procedures were brought to the attention of the
author. Two of these deserve to be mentioned here.
First is the method used by Nakanishi10 in 1972 to
simulate the oscillating Lotka reactions. Like the computational method described above, Nakanishi’s method
is expressly designed to numerically simulate the stochastic
=

-

The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

The expression for P(r, g) in (18) is, like the master
equation (13), a rigorous mathematical consequence of the
fundamental hypothesis (4). Notice that P(r, g) depends
on all the reaction constants (not just on cj, and on the
current numbers of molecules of all reactant species (not
just on the RM reactants).
IIIC. The Stochastic Simulation Algorithm. At the
beginning of section IIIB, we observed that essentially what
is needed to simulate the time evolution of a chemically
reacting system is some way of specifying when the next
reaction will occur and what kind of reaction it will be. We
can now frame this requirement in more precise, mathematical terms: What is needed is a method for drawing
or “generating” a pair (r, g) from the set of random pairs
whose probability density function is P(r, g) in (18). It
turns out that there is a simple, rigorous way of doing this
on a digital computer, provided we have access to a reliable
“unit-interval uniform random number generator”.
A unit-interval uniform random number generator is a
computer subprogram which, when called, calculates and
returns a random (or more properly, a “pseudorandom”)
number r from the uniform distribution in the unit interval; that is, the a priori probability that any generated
number r will fall inside any given subinterval [a, b] of the
unit interval [0,1] is equal to b a. Nowadays, virtually
every large digitial computer facility has one of these
subprograms in its library file that is fast, easy to use, and
sufficiently reliable.8 When called, the typical generator
subprogram calculates the required pseudorandom number
r by performing a few relatively simple operations on the
previous pseudorandom number that was calculated.
Thus, n successive calls will produce a “chain” of n
pseudorandom numbers. The first number of the chain
is determined by initializing the generator with a userchosen starter number, different starter numbers will
result in different but statistically equivalent chains.
Now, if our goal were to generate a random pair (r, g)
according to the probability density function
11
if 0 < r < 1 and 0 < g < 1
P \r,g)
\
(20a)

2346

computational procedure as a “hybrid method, intermediate between differential equation solution and Monte
Carlo”. However, they derive their method in a rather
heuristic way within the context of the deterministic
formalism instead of the stochastic formalism, and it is not
at all clear from their development in precisely what respects their method should be regarded as approximate.
From the standpoint of our exact computational procedure,
though, the method of Bunker et al. appears to be
somewhat better than its inventors may have supposed.
The stochastic simulation algorithm described in this
paper has both its advantages and its limitations. Although these can be more readily appreciated in the
context of the specific applications presented in the next
section, we shall now summarize briefly the principle
strengths and weaknesses of this computational approach.
On the plus side, the method has the following advantages:
(1) The stochastic simulation algorithm is exact, in the

that it takes full account of the fluctuations and
correlations implied by the fundamental hypothesis (4).
This is a consequence of the fact that, like the spatially
homogeneous master equation, the stochastic simulation
algorithm has been derived from (4) in a mathematically
rigorous way.
(2) Unlike standard numerical methods for numerically
solving systems of differential equations, the stochastic
simulation algorithm never approximates infinitesimal
time increments df by finite time steps At.12 This will be
especially advantageous when dealing with systems in
which the molecular population levels can change suddenly
and sharply with time.
(3) As is evident from Figure 2, the stochastic simulation
algorithm is very easy to code in Fortran for any specified
set of chemical reactions, no matter how complicated or
highly coupled these reactions may be.
(4) A stochastic simulation computer program will
normally require very little in the way of computer memory
space. For N molecular species and M reaction channels,
the principle variables to be stored are the N X; values,
the M c„ values, and the M + 1 a„ values—a total of only
N + 2M + 1 in all. Notice in particular that, although the
amount of computer memory required does depend on the
number of species N, it does not depend on the numbers
of molecules of these various species.
(5) In terms of the “statistical ensemble of systems.”
envisioned in the master equation approach, the stochastic
simulation algorithm essentially provides us with information on the time behavior of individual ensemble
members, such as one would observe in an ideal laboratory
experiment. This complements quite nicely the information on the time behavior of ensemble averages which
sense

The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

the master equation approach provides through the various
moments of the grand probability function P.
(6) When ensemble averages (e.g., means, variances,
correlations) cannot be readily calculated from the master
equation, the stochastic simulation approach offers a
universally straightforward (though possibly time-consuming) way of numerically estimating them.
On the minus side, the stochastic simulation algorithm
has the following limitations:
(1) A stochastic simulation computer program often
requires lots of computer time to execute. From a cost
standpoint, this fact is somewhat offset by the fact that
such programs typically occupy only a small amount of
computer memory. Nevertheless, the stochastic simulation
algorithm places a high premium on the speed of the
computer’s central arithmetical unit.
(2) This computer time limitation essentially limits the
total number of molecular reactions that can be simulated;
indeed, the execution time for a given set of reactions will
be roughly proportional to that number. This in turn
implies limits on the total numbers of molecules involved
and/or the total system time that can be simulated. In
other words, the stochastic simulation algorithm is restricted to distinctly finite chemical systems. However,
in view of the fact that chemical reactions are usually
rather “local” affairs, even for systems which as a whole
contain enormous numbers of molecules, it is conceivable
that this limitation might in some cases be more of an
advantage than a disadvantage.
(3) The stochastic simulation algorithm requires a
“reliable” unit-interval uniform random number generator;
however, a specific criterion for “reliability” is hard to come
by. Many of the generators available today are quite good,
and are probably quite adequate for our stochastic simulation algorithm, but the possibility of trouble from this
source should never be ignored.
(4) The stochastic simulation approach requires making
several runs to estimate ensemble averages. Depending
on the dynamical quantity whose ensemble average is
desired, and also the statistical accuracy required of its
estimate, the number of runs needed for averaging may
run afoul of computer time/cost limitations.

IV. Illustrative Applications of the Algorithm
We shall now present some numerical results that have
been obtained in applying the stochastic simulation algorithm to several spatially homogeneous model chemical
systems. Although our results may provide a few new
insights into some of the systems treated; it should be kept
in mind that the systems themselves are not the primary
focus of our discussion here; rather, our principle objective
is to demonstrate that the stochastic simulation algorithm
is a feasible and potentially useful method for numerically

calculating the temporal behavior of coupled chemical
reactions. We shall begin by considering some fairly simple
systems, and then proceed to three successively more
complicated systems, namely, the Lotka reactions, the
Brusselator, and the Oregonator.
IVA. Some Simple Systems. Perhaps the simplest
nontrivial “set of coupled chemical reactions” that one can
write is the irreversible isomerization (or radioactive decay)
reaction
X-+ z

(22)

This is a pedagogically attractive first problem to tackle
because it can be solved analytically, without approxi-

mations, in both the deterministic and the stochastic
formulations. In the deterministic formulation we have

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

process described by the spatially homogeneous master
equation. However, Nakanishi’s computational algorithm
is neither as exact nor as efficient as ours. Essentially, it
divides the time scale up into small bins At and then
decides on the basis of a random number which, if any,
of the M reaction types should be made to occur in each
At. This approximate procedure becomes exact in the limit
At -* 0, but unfortunately the efficiency of the procedure
becomes nil in that same limit.
Much closer to our algorithm from an operational
standpoint is the computational scheme proposed by
Bunker et al.11 in 1974. In terms of our notation, Bunker
et al. use the same /^-selection process as (21b), but they
replace the r-selection process in (21a) by simply r = l/a0.
Since l/a0 is precisely the mean of the r values generated
according to (21a), this substitution is a very reasonable
approximation. Bunker et al. correctly characterize their

Daniel T. Gillespie

2347

Stochastic Simulation of Coupled Chemical Reactions

the reaction-rate equation [cf. (1)]

dX/dt

=

-

a

cX

(23a)

whose solution, given that X = X0 at t = 0, is

X(t)

=

(23b)

X0e~ct

In the stochastic formulation, we may easily derive the
master equation [cf. (13)]

ftP(X; t)

=

c[ex,x0(X + 1 )P(X + 1; t)

-

XP(X; t)]

(24a)

-

P(X; t]

=

X!(XV~ X)!
(X=0, 1,...,X0)

e~°Xt [1

°0

3

1

3

4

5

6

8

7

B

10

-

"

(24b)

This is in the standard form of a binomial or Bernoulli
probability function, and it is not difficult to calculate its
mean and rms deviation directly from the definitions (8)
and (9). They turn out to be

Xw(t)

=

X0e~ct

(24c)

and

A(t)

=

[X0e-Ct(l- e~ct)]112

(24d)

The fact that the stochastic mean X(1)(f) in (24c) is exactly
equal to the deterministic function X(t) in (23b) will rarely
be true for more complicated chemical systems.
To apply our stochastic simulation algorithm to reaction
=
X in
22, we put M = N = 1, Ci = c, Xi = X, and hi
Figure 2 (and we also note that the r2 calculations in step
2 can be omitted). In Figure 3 we show, for
c= 0.5, X0= 1000
(Figure 3)
(25)
how the results found in a typical stochastic simulation
run of reaction 22 compare with the predictions of the
master equation. The two dashed curves in Figure 3 are
X<1,(f) dt A(t) (the one-standard deviation envelope), and
the two solid curves are X(1)(t) ± 2A(t) (the two-standard
deviation envelope). The dots, of course, represent the
trajectory of the stochastic simulation run. A dot has been
plotted at the (t, X) value found immediately after the
of each molecular reaction. No attempt has
occurrence
been made to smooth these dots with a continuous connecting curve, so they essentially represent the “raw
output” of the simulation run. The horizontal spacing
between the dots gives a direct measure of the time
separation between successive reactions, and as we should
expect, the average time separation between successive
isomerizations (decays) increases as the number of X
molecules decreases. Because there were 1000 X molecules
at t = 0, a total of 1000 reactions are simulated here,
requiring exactly 1000 passes through the 1-2-3 loop of
Figure 2. In this particular simulation run, all but 6 of the
X molecules had isomerized (decayed) by t = 10; the last
X molecule did not disappear until t = 15.6. The unit of
time will depend upon the units assigned to the reaction
constant c, and is irrelevant to our purposes here.
The procedure used to obtain this plot was as follows:
First, the computational steps outlined in Figure 2 were
Fortran coded into a simulation program for reaction 22;
provisions were made in this program so that the current
(t, X) value would be written out on a mass-storage file

l

0
0

1000

2000

3000

4000

6000

0000

number of Y1 molecules

Figure 8. Results of a 1 X 106 reaction stochastic simulation run of
the Lotka reactions (38), with c,X = 10, c2 = 0.01, and c3 = 10,
corresponding to the deterministic steady-state X, = Y2 = 1000. (a)
Combined 100 rpd plots of V, (left-shifted curve) and Y2 (right-shifted
curve) vs. t for 0 < f < 10. (b) A 100 rpd plot of Y1 vs. t for 0 < t
< 30. (c) A 100 rpd plot of Y2 vs. V, for 0 < f < 30.

after every reaction, and also on paper after every five
reactions. This simulation program was then executed on
a Univac 1110 computer, and the resulting paper output
was examined for the purpose of determining how the data
should be plotted. Then, a plotting program was written
to read off the data from the mass-storage file and construct the plot. The plotting program consisted primarily
of Fortran calls to appropriate subroutines from the
standard DISSPLA (Display Integrated Software System and
Plotting Language) library. Execution of the plotting
program on the Univac 1110 computer caused the plot to
be constructed on a device called an FR-80, which essentially is a cathode ray tube whose screen image is
automatically recorded on photographic film; the resulting
The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

is by definition zero if
where the “Kronecker epsilon”
=
1
j and unity if i ^ j. This equation can be solved for
the initial condition P(X; 0) = 8 x,x0 by dealing with it
successively for X = X0, X = X0 1, X = X0 2, etc. In
this way we find the solution

2348

Daniel T. Gillespie

current state (t, X) on the plotting file after every 5 reactions, and on paper after every 25 reactions.
Henceforth, we shall specify the number of reactions
that occur between each dot that appears on a simulation
output graph by the notation

rpd

=

reactions per dot

(27)

Thus, Figure 3 is a 1 rpd plot, while Figure 4 is a 5 rpd plot.
In Figure 5 we show a 10 rpd plot of a simulation run of
reaction 22 for

0.5, X0= 10000
(28)
(Figure 5)
Figures 3-5 illustrate two important, but certainly not
unexpected, points: First, as the initial number of X
molecules is increased, the temporal behavior of the system
c=

and more the appearance of the continuous,

deterministic process described by the reaction-rate
equation (23). Second, regardless of the initial number of
X molecules, the temporal behavior as calculated by the
stochastic simulation algorithm is entirely consistent with
the predictions of the master equation (24). Of course, we
are not attempting to prove here that the stochastic
simulation algorithm provides a correct description of the
time evolution of a chemically reacting system, for this has
already been established in an a priori manner in sections
II and III; rather, our purpose here is simply to demonstrate that this computational method is capable of being
implemented. Figures 3-5 offer rather convincing proof
of the feasibility of the stochastic simulation algorithm for
the simple reaction 22. In this connection, we might note
that the total cost of simulating and plotting the rim shown
in Figure 5 was about $5, the cost being split roughly
equally between the simulating and plotting programs.
We turn next to a somewhat more complicated set of

}

reactions:

X+Y^2Y

(29a)

2Y^*Z

Figure 9. Same as Figure 8 for a second simulation run, which differed
from the first only in the choice of the “starter number" for the
unit-interval uniform random number generator.

(29b)
Here, the bar over X signifies that the molecular population level of this species is assumed to remain constant,
either because the system is open to a large reservoir of
X, or else because X is initially present in such great
abundance that its depletion by reaction 29a will be
negligible over any reasonable period of time.
The set of reactions (29) is of some interest because
Malek-Mansour and Nicolis13 recently claimed that it
provides a refutation of the basic stochastic hypothesis (4):
They proved that the master equation for reactions 29 is
such that dP(Y; t)/at = 0 if and only if Y = 0; yet, the
reaction-rate equation for (29)

dY/dt

=

CiXY- 2(c2/2)Y2

film negative, together with an enlarged, 8V2 * H in.
Xerox positive print, constitute the output of the plotting

evidently possesses two steady-state solutions
ys = 0

program run.
This two-step procedure (a simulation program followed
by a plotting program) was used in obtaining all the plots
shown in this paper. However, the numbers of reactions
allowed to occur between the sampling outputs, both on
the plotting file and on paper, can be varied as the situation warrants. In Figure 4 we show another simulation
run of reaction 22, this one with

and

(26)
0.5, X0 5000
(Figure 4)
As before, the dashed curves show the one-standard deviation envelope as calculated from the master equation
c =

=

(24), while the solid curves form the two-standard deviation
envelope. However, in this run we chose to write out the
The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

(30)
(31a)

(31b)
cxXic2
and it can be shown that the first of these is mathematYs =

ically unstable while the second is mathematically stable.
This lead Malek-Mansour and Nicolis to conclude that the
stochastic formalism upon which the master equation is
based “seems to have destroyed the stable solution [31b]
of the macroscopic equation [30] and preserved, instead,
the physically unacceptable trivial (and unstable) solution
[31a]: Even if the system starts initially with a great
number of [Y] molecules, it will be driven eventually to
extinction”.13
Since the master equation and the stochastic simulation

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

assumes more

Stochastic Simulation of Coupled Chemical Reactions

2349

stochastic approach] are not correctly written”, as was
concluded by Malek-Mansour and Nicolis.13
Shortly after the simulation runs in Figures 6 and 7 had
been performed, the author received a preprint of an article
by Gortz and Walls,14 in which essentially these same
conclusions were arrived at using an ingenious analytical
technique based on the master equation. The reader is
invited to consult their paper for further insights into this
matter. Suffice it here to say that the objections to the
stochastic formulation of chemical kinetics which Malek-Mansour and Nicolis13 have raised on the basis of their
analysis of reactions 29 are now seen to be groundless. The
fact that our numerical simulation algorithm was helpful
in clarifying this essentially theoretical matter obviously
speaks well for the potential usefulness of the algorithm.
In addition to providing information on if and how a
steady state is approached, the stochastic simulation
algorithm can also be used to estimate various statistical
properties of the steady state. For example, returning to
the situation illustrated in Figure 6 [reaction 29 with cx
and c2 as given in (32)], it is important to know just how
well the population mean in the steady state is approximated by the reaction-rate equation estimate cxX/c2 =
1000; and it is also important to know how large the natural
random fluctuations will be about that steady-state mean.
Essentially what we are asking for here are the asymptotic
values of the first moment Y*{t) and variance A2(f) of the
solution to the master equation for reactions 29. To obtain
estimates of these values, we proceeded as follows: Starting
with 1000 Y molecules at t = 0, we made a stochastic
simulation run to t = 0.3, at which time we recorded the
number of Y molecules present; to simulate this length of
system time required roughly 2000 reactions, and this was
judged sufficient to make the system “forget” the initial
number of Y molecules. Repeating this process 4000 times,
each time using different random numbers from URN (see
Figure 2), we then estimated the mean and variance of the
Y values found at t = 0.3 by a straightforward averaging
procedure. The results of these calculations were
,

algorithm are logically equivalent to each other, we can test

this conclusion simply by making a few simulation runs
of reactions 29. For this, we need only apply the procedure
outlined in Figure 2 with M = 2, N = 1, Xx = Y, hx = XY,
and h2 = Y(Y l)/2. In Figure 6 we show a 10 rpd plot
of two such runs with
cxX= 5, c2 0.005
(Figure 6)
(32)
-

=

for the initial conditions Y = 10 and Y = 3000. Contrary
to what we might have expected from the result of Malek-Mansour and Nicolis, we see that both of these initial
conditions lead to a situation in which the Y molecule
population level fluctuates in a random but apparently
stable manner over values in the vicinity of cxX/c2 = 1000,
in reasonable agreement with the reaction-rate equation
prediction (31b). In Figure 7 we show a 40 rpd plot of two

simulation runs of (29), these with

more

cxX

5, c2 = 0.00125

(Figure 7)
(33)
for the two initial conditions Y = 40 and Y = 12000. Again,
both initial conditions lead to stable random fluctuations
over values in the vicinity of cxX/c2 = 4000. The only
essential difference between the plots in Figures 6 and 7
is that the relative fluctuations in Figure 7 are about half
as large as those in Figure 6: this is due to the fact that
the molecular population levels in Figure 7 are four times
larger than those in Figure 6.
The fact that the master equation for reactions 29
predicts a stable stationary state at Y = 0 can be easily
understood directly from (29): clearly, if it should ever
happen that the Y molecule population level ever drops
to exactly zero, then that condition will persist indefinitely.
However, it is very misleading to say that, if we start out
with Y > 0, the system will be “driven” to Y = 0; for, as
Figures 6 and 7 show quite convincingly, in such cases the
Y molecule population level exhibits a definite affinity for
values near cxX/c2. Of course, it is always possible that
a chance, momentary, pairwise confluence of all the Y
molecules could result in their complete annihilation via
reaction 29b; and because this is possible, it will eventually
happen if we just wait long enough (t -» »). However, this
contingency is not especially significant from a macroscopic point of view; indeed, an examination of the trajectories in Figures 6 and 7 for t > 2 shows that, even for
these relatively small numbers of molecules, one would
have to wait an incredibly long time before observing a
random fluctuation large enough to carry the system from
the vicinity of Y = cxX/c2 down to Y = 0. More to the
point here, though, is the fact that this contingency does
not imply that the “transition probabilities [used in the
=

+
Ys(1) =* 999.9 1.2

and

As2

-

1450 ± 75

(34)

where the ± uncertainties represent 95% confidence
limits. The deterministic estimate of 1000 for the
steady-state mean Yg(1) is obviously well within our uncertainty limits. As for the steady-state variance As2, a
subsequent analytical calculation furnished by Walls,15
using the computational procedure of Gortz and Walls,14
gave the result Ag2 = (3/2)Ys(1) for reaction 22; in the
present case this would imply As2 = 1500, which is obviously quite consistent with our result in (34).
The fact that the steady-state mean and variance are
not equal to each other for reactions 29 is related to the
fact that these reactions do not operate under conditions
of chemical equilibrium (the reactions are irreversible, and
they are also “driven” by the effective influx of X molecules). Another simple set of reactions which does not
operate under conditions of chemical equilibrium is the
set

X^Y

(35a)

2Y^->Z

(35b)

It has been shown by Nicolis,16 Mazo,17 and Gortz and
Walls,14 using three different analytical techniques based
on the master equation, that reactions 35 will have As2
(3/4) Yg(1). The significance of this result has been commented on by several authors.18,19 Taking
=

cxX

=

106,

c2 =

l

(36)

The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Voi. 81, No. 25, 1977

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

Figure 10. Combined 100 rpd plots of X (dark curve), V, (upper
oscillating curve), and Y2 (lower oscillating curve) vs. t for a stochastic
simulation run of the closedLotka reactions, with c, = 0.0001, c2 =
0.01, and c3 = 10.

2350

Daniel T. Gillespie

which yields a deterministic estimate for Y9(1) of
/c2)1/2
=
1000, we applied our stochastic simulation procedure to
these reactions in essentially the same way that we did in
obtaining the estimates in (34). The results were
Ys(1>

1000.7 ± 0.9 and As2 - 762 ± 35

-

(37)

where again the ± uncertainties represent 95% confidence
limits. Our result for As2 is obviously consistent with the
theoretically predicted value of 750.
The computer programs used to obtain the statistical
estimates in (34) and (37) are easy to write, especially since
they require no periodic write-outs for subsequent plotting.
However, in performing this type of calculation, care must
be taken to make each run long enough to wipe out effects
due to the choice of the initial state. Moreover, as is typical
of Monte Carlo estimates of averages, if one wishes to
reduce the uncertainties by 1//, one must make f2 times
as many runs. These two features can conspire to make
such calculations rather time consuming on a computer,
and hence rather expensive; for example, it cost about $160
to obtain the figures quoted in (37). The chief advantage
of the method is that it is universally applicable, and does
not require complicated or specialized analytical techniques. The method is therefore best reserved for cases
in which an analytical calculation either cannot be made
at all, or else is of questionable validity because of various
approximations employed.
IVB. The Lotka Reactions. In 1920, Lotka observed
that the set of coupled, autocatalytic reactions20
X + Y,

2Y,

(38a)

Y, + Y2

2Y2

(38b)

Ya^-*Z

(38c)

possessed some remarkable dynamical properties.21
Several years later, Volterra independently investigated

the use of the corresponding reaction-rate equations

dYx/dt
dY2/df

=

cxXYx- c2YxY2

(39a)

(39b)
c2YxY2 c3Y2
to mathematically model a simple predator-prey ecosystem.22 Although the predator-prey interpretation of
the Lotka reactions is a bit crude and cannot be pushed
too far, it is helpful for visualizing and understanding the
dynamics of these reactions. Thus, reaction 38b describes
how a certain predator species Y2 reproduces by feeding
on a certain prey species Yx; reaction 38a describes how
Yx reproduces by feeding on a certain foodstuff X, which
is assumed here to be only insignificantly depleted thereby;
and the isomerization 38c describes the eventual demise
=

-

The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

Figure 12. Results of a 1.5 X 106 reaction stochastic simulation run
of the Lotka reactions including reaction 38d, with c. = 0.0002, c2
=
0.01, c3 = c4 = 10, and X= 105 (constant), corresponding to the
deterministic steady-state Yx= Y2 = 1000. (a) A 200 rpd plot of Y,
vs. f for 0 5 t< 30. (b) A 200 rpd plot of Y2 vs. Y, for 0 < t < 30.

of Y2 through natural causes.
A steady state system would be characterized by the
condition

dYx/df

=

dY2/df

=

0

and it is easy to show from (39) that this condition is
satisfied when
(40)
Yx=YXs = c3/c2 and Y2 = Y2s b exX/c2

That is, if we start out at t

=
0 with Yx = YXb and Y2 = Y2b,
then the deterministic reaction-rate equations predict that
this situation will persist indefinitely. However, as we shall
now see, the physically more realistic stochastic approach
tells quite a different story.
A stochastic simulation computer program for the Lotka
reactions was written according to the scheme in Figure
2 (putting M = 3, N = 2, Xx = Yx, X2 = Y2, hx = XYx, h2
=
YxY2, and h3 = Y2)'. Figures 8a, 8b, and 8c show three
plots of one simulation run of this program with
cxX 10, c2 0.01, c3 10 (Figures 8, 9)
=

=

=

(41)
for the initial condition Yx

=
1000 and Y2
Y2b
Yx>
1000. Figure 8a shows the Yx and Y2 population levels
plotted against time, at 100 rpd, over the interval 0 < t
< 10; the leading (left-shifted) curve is the Yx (prey)
population, and the lagging (right-shifted) curve is the Y2
=

=

=

(predator) population. Instead of remaining constant at
the 1000 level, as the reaction-rate equations (39) predict,
the Yx and Y2 populations are seen to develop a pronounced oscillatory behavior. These oscillations are ev-

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

Figure 11. Same as Figure 10, but for another simulation run in which
only the random number starter was changed.

Stochastic Simulation of Coupled Chemical Reactions

idently characterized by a fairly stable frequency and phase
difference, but a markedly unstable amplitude. Figure 8b
is a 100 rpd plot of Yx only over the interval 0 < t < 30,
illustrating more completely the stability of the frequency
and the instability of the amplitude. And Figure 8c is a
100 rpd plot over this same time interval showing the
counterclockwise “orbits” traced out in the Y3Y2 plane.
The simulation run from which the plots in Figures 8a-c
were constructed contained a total of 1 X 106 reactions.
The cost of compiling and executing the simulation
program for this run on the Univac 1110 computer was
about $40, and the subsequent plotting programs averaged
about $9 per graph.
Figures 9a, 9b, and 9c are 100 rpd plots of a second
Lotka simulation run; this run was identical with the first
except that a different chain of random numbers was used
(i.e., the “starter number” for the unit-interval uniform
random number generator was changed). A comparison
of Figures 8a and 9a shows that, although the frequencies
and the phase-differences are essentially the same in both
runs, the amplitude variations are quite different; furthermore, at any particular instant (e.g., t = 10) the Yx and
Y2 values in Figure 9a are usually quite different from the
Yx and Y2 values in Figure 8a. Although it might seem
from these two figures that the vagaries in the amplitude
are less pronounced in the second run than in the first run,
a comparison of Figures 8b and 9b shows that this is true
only temporarily: between t = 12 and t = 22 in the second
run, the population oscillations become quite extreme,
ranging over two full orders of magnitude. The Yx-Y2
phase relationship in these large amplitude oscillations is
illustrated in the 100 rpd plot in Figure 6c; the quasiconcentric orbits in this figure were traced in the counterclockwise direction, just as in Figure 8c.
In retrospect, it is not hard to see why the Lotka model
exhibits an out-of-phase oscillatory behavior: A rise in the
prey population provides food for the reproduction of the
predators, and hence is followed shortly by a rise in the
predator population; but this leads to an increased consumption of preys and an eventual decline in the prey
population; the resultant food shortage for the predators
leads to a decline in their population, which in turn permits
the prey population to increase again; and so on. In fact,
if we were to solve the reaction-rate equations (39) for an
arbitrary initial state (Y10, Y20), the solution, when plotted
in the Yt Y2 plane, would be a counterclockwise closed orbit
about (Y1b, Y2), passing through the initial point (Y10, Y20),
and shaped very much like the loops in Figures 8c and 9c.
Further analysis of eq 39 would reveal that this solution
orbit is, in mathematical terms, “neutrally stable”; i.e., if

perturbed slightly to a point (Yxx, Y21) off of that orbit,
the system will begin orbiting on the solution orbit which
passes through (Yxx, Y21). Thus, one way of viewing the
behavior of the Lotka model is to say that the microscopic
random fluctuations inherent in the reactions cause the
system to execute a “drunkard’s walk” over the continuum
of concentric, neutrally stable solution orbits, staggering
sometimes outward and sometimes inward. In the case of
Figure 9c, we see that the system has wandered out to
solution orbits that approach to within less than 40 units
of the Yx and Y2 axes. Clearly, it is only a matter of time
before a random fluctuation carries the system’s phase
point into one of these two axes. When that happens, the
orbiting will cease: For if the system point, in its counterclockwise orbiting, should ever graze the Y2 axis, then
the prey species Yx will become extinct, and reaction 38c
will drive the system point straight down the Y2 axis into
the origin. Similarly, if the system point should ever graze
the Yx axis, then the predator species Y2 will become
extinct, and reaction 38a will drive the system point
straight out the Yx axis to infinity. In short, no matter
what the state of the system is initially, it will eventually
wind up in either the state (Y3 = 0, Y2 = 0) or the state
(Yx = », Y2 = 0).

The Lotka reactions thus provide a striking example of

a model chemical system whose temporal behavior cannot

be realistically calculated without taking specific account

of the random fluctuations that occur at the microscopic
level of the interactions. Although it is true that a considerable amount of information about the behavior of the
Lotka model can be extracted from the deterministic
formulation of chemical kinetics [i.e., the reaction-rate
equations (39)], the stochastic formulation clearly provides
a much more natural framework for this. In particular,
the stochastic simulation algorithm leads routinely and
automatically to a correct numerical description of the time
evolution of the Lotka model without the need for any
circumspect considerations of analytical stability.
The numerical parameters used in Figures 8 and 9 are
the same as used earlier by Nakanishi10 in his stochastic
simulation calculations on the Lotka model. Nakanishi
did not exhibit Yx~Y2 phase plots as in Figures 8c and 9c,
but he did subject his data to a detailed time-series analysis
to determine the frequency components of the oscillations.
As mentioned in section HID, our stochastic simulation
method represents a improvement over Nakanishi’s method in terms of both rigor and ease of application. Also,
our results bring out somewhat more clearly than did
Nakanishi’s results the relative ease with which the Lotka
system can progress from the stationary state (Yib, Y2s) to
the absorbing states (0, 0) or (°°, 0).
Figure 10 is a 50 rpd plot of the Lotka reactions showing
what happens when we “close” the system and let the X
population be depleted by reaction 38a in the normal way.
The modification required in the simulation program to
effect this depletion is trivial: in the section of the program
which increments the Yx population by 1 after an Rx
reaction has occurred, we simply add an instruction to
decrement the X population by 1. In the run plotted in
Figure 10 we used essentially the same parameters as in
the previous Lotka runs, but we have allowed X to decrease from an initial value of 105:
cx
0.0001, c2 0.01, c3 10
(42)
(Figures 10, 11)
The heavy appearance of the X population trajectory is
due to a “photographic burn” in the plotting hardware
caused by the severe overlapping of successively plotted
dots. The curve that oscillates about the 1000 level until
=

=

=

The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

Figure 13. Combined 50 rpd plots of X(dark curve), Y1 (upper oscillating
curve), and Y2 (lower oscillating curve) vs. time, showing what would
have happened in the run of Figure 12 if Xhad not been held constant.

2351

2352

Daniel T. Gillespie

that the random number starter was changed. Again we
see the extreme variability in the Lotka system: the
vanishing of the Y2’s occurs at t ^ 28 in Figure 11, as
19 in Figure 10; also, the final number
compared with t
of Yx’s in Figure 11 turns out to be 7232, as compared with
16449 in Figure 10.
The behavior illustrated in Figures 10 and 11 suggests
that a number of modifications could be made in the Lotka

a

~

| W°°:

I
1

reactions (38) to make them a more realistic model of
naturally occurring predator-prey systems. As a simple
illustration, suppose we add a fourth reaction to (38a-c)
i

u- lj

0.0002, c2 0.01, c3 c4 10
(43)
(Figures 12, 13)
and starting with X = 105 and Yx
Y2
103, two stochastic simulation runs were made. In one of these runs
X was held constant, and in the other X was allowed to
cx

=

=

=

=

=

=

be depleted by reaction 38a. The results of the constant
X run are plotted at 200 rpd in Figures 12a and 12b. These

time

Figure 14. Results of a 2 X 106 reaction stochastic simulation run of
the Brusselator reactions (44), with c1X1 = 5000, c2X2 = 50, c3 =
0.00005, and c4 = 5, corresponding to the deterministic steady state
Y = 1000 and Y2 = 2000. (a) A 100 rpd plot of Y vs. ffor 0 <
f < 14. (b) A 100 rpd plot of Y2 vs. ffor 0 < f< 14. (c) A 50 rpd
plot of Y2 vs. Y for 0 < f < 18.1.

zooming off the graph at about t = 19 is the Yx population
curve. The curve that oscillates about a steadily decreasing
value until it reaches zero at about t = 19 is the Y2
population curve. The waviness of the X population curve
is a direct consequence of the Yx oscillations, since the
drain on X will be large when Yx is large and small when
Yx is small. It is interesting to note that the depletion in
the prey foodstuff X is more detrimental to the predators
than to the preys. After the Y2’s become extinct at f ^
19, the remaining 15000 or so X’s are simply converted
into Yx’s via reaction 38a. (Notice that the Yx’s do not use

X for sustinence but only for reproduction.) Figure 11
shows another run identical with that in Figure 10 except
The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

two plots are obviously very similar to the plots in Figures
8 and 9 (except that this modified run contains about half
again as many reactions). Indeed, the reaction-rate
equations for reactions 38a-d predict that, if X is held
constant at 105 and cx.....c4 have the values in (43), then
we will have dYx/df = dY2/d( = 0 for Yx = Y2 = 1000, just
as we had in the runs in Figures 8 and 9. In Figure 13 we
show a 50 rpd plot of the other simulation run, in which
X is allowed to be depleted. As in Figures 10 and 11, the
heavy curve is the X trajectory, the upper oscillating curve
is the Yx trajectory, and the lower oscillating curve is the
Y2 trajectory. As expected, Yx as well as Y2 becomes
extinct in this case. However, it is intriguing to note that
Y2 becomes extinct considerably before Yx does, even
though the natural life expectancy of a Yx is the same here
as the natural life expectancy of a Y2 (i.e., l/c4 = l/c3).
It is also interesting to note that over 40% of the initial
amount of X remains after both Yx and Y2 have become
extinct.
It is obviously possible to modify the Lotka reactions
in many other ways to obtain models of various other
predator-prey systems. Suffice it here to say that, so long
as these modifications can be expressed as additional
chemical reactions and/or additional chemical species, they
can be easily incorporated into our stochastic simulation
computer program in a completely exact manner.
IVC. The Brusselator. The neutrally stable character
of the oscillations in the Lotka model, as illustrated by the
phase trajectory plots in Figures 8c and 9c, leads us to
wonder if there exists a model set of coupled chemical
reactions with “positively stable” oscillations. More
precisely, is there a model chemically reacting system with
two intermediate species Yx and Y2 which has the property
that, no matter what its initial state, the system will
eventually wind up orbiting around a well-defined, closed,
stable path in the YXY2 plane? This question has been
answered in the affirmative by workers in Brussels,23 who
have devised the following example of such a “limit cycle”
chemical oscillator:20
X, -i* Y,
X2 + Y,

(44a)

-L Y2 + Z,

(44b)

2Y, + Y2 -L 3Y,

(44c)

Y, —

(44d)

Z2

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

Z
Y,
(38d)
which allows the preys to die of natural causes in the same
way as the predators. Taking

2353

Stochastic Simulation of Coupled Chemical Reactions

and

(46b)

2c2X2c4/c1XiC3

Y2s =

stochastic
Following the prescription of Figure
simulation computer program was written for the
Brusselator (putting M = 4, IV = 2, Xx = Yx, X2 = Y2, hx
=
=
Xx, h2 = X2Yx, hs = Y2Y1(Y1 l)/2, and h4 Yx). With
2, a

-

CjXi

=

=

5000, c2X2 50, c3
0.00005, c4 5
(47)
(Figures 14-17)
set
to
with
and
run
was
made
a simulation
Y2 initially
Yx
=

=

Figure 16. Showing what would have happened in the run of Figure
14 if the system had been closed to species Xv The exponentially
decaying curve in (a) and (b) is a 250 rpd plot of X,; the oscillating
Y1 curve in (a) and Y2 curve in (b) are both plotted at 100 rpd.

This set of reactions has been dubbed the “Brusselator”
by Tyson,24 and has been the object of extensive study by
a number of workers.23,24 The deterministic reaction-rate
equations for the Brusselator are evidently

dYJdt

=

c1X1

-

c2X2Y1 +

(c3/2)Y12y2-c4Y,
dY2/dt c2X2 Yl (c3/2) YX2Y2
=

-

(45a)

(45b)

and it is easy to show from these that dYx/df = dY2/dt
=
0 when Yx = Yls and Y2 = Y2l, where

Y1s=c1X1/c4

(46a)

the values Yls = 1000 and Y^ = 2000. Figures 14a and 14b
are 100 rpd plots of Yx vs. t and Y2 vs. t, respectively, over
the time interval 0 < t < 14. Clearly, Yx and Y2 do not
remain at the stationary values Yls and Y2s, but commence
almost immediately to oscillate vigorously in an apparently
regular and stable way. The sharp rises in Yx in Figure
14a coincide with the sharp falls in Y2 in Figure 14b so
closely that they appear to be single vertical lines when
the two figures are superposed. It is worth noting that
these sudden, drastic changes in the molecular population
levels pose no special problems to our stochastic simulation
procedure. Figure 14c is a 50 rpd plot of Yx vs. Y2 over
the slightly longer time interval 0 < t < 18; the cycle
direction here is clockwise. The data in Figures 14a-c are
from a 2 X 106 reaction simulation run, which took the
Univac 1110 computer about 7 min to perform, at a cost
of about $60.
Although Figure 14c shows that the phase orbits in the
Brusselator are indeed much more stable than the phase
orbits in the Lotka model [cf. Figures 8c and 9c], Figure
14c also shows a rather peculiar property of the Brusselator
oscillations which, so far as the author is aware, has never
been noticed before. This is the apparent inability of the
system to consistently retrace its previous path on the
diagonal leg of the limit cycle. The variability in these
diagonal traces is directly related to the erratic variations
in the heights of the peaks in Figures 14a and 14b. Although obviously caused by random fluctuations at the
microscopic level, the effect itself is clearly more than
microscopic: the relative variations in the peak heights
in Figures 14a and 14b are on the order of 12%, which is
a good order of magnitude larger than one would expect
on the basis of the usual “square root” argument. The time
intervals between successive oscillations, as determined by
the distances between the successive vertical rise lines in
Figure 14a, show similar variations. Relatively crude ruler
measurements on the graphs themselves indicate that the
peak height achieved on any vertical rise in the Yx plot in
The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

Figure 15. A 50 rpd plot of Y2 vs. V, for four stochastic simulation
runs of the Brusselator (44), each run having the same reaction parameters as in Figure 14 but different initial values of V, and Y2.

Figure 17. Showing what would have happened in the run of Figure
14 if the system had been closed to species X2. The heavy, smooth
curve is X2, plotted at 250 rpd; the decaying jagged curve is Y2, and
the horizontal jagged curve is Y,, both plotted at 100 rpd.

2354

Daniel T. Gillespie

warrant further investigations, although we shall not attempt any here.
The Brusselator phase trajectory in Figure 14c seems
to have a different “character” along each of the three legs
of the limit cycle. The peculiar character of the trajectory
along the diagonal leg has already been commented on.
Along the vertical leg the trajectory is fairly sharp and
well-defined, subject to rather ordinary looking fluctua-

tions. However, the trajectory along the horizontal leg has
a thicker, labored look, with fluctuations that appear to
be more “diagonal” than “up and down”. Indeed, it almost
seems that the
plane is scored with a series of closely
spaced, parallel diagonal grooves: Starting at the right end
of the horizontal trajectory, the system phase point seems
to struggle along against these grooves until it reaches the
The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

Figure 19. Same as Figure 18, except a = 0.2 (corresponding to the
same reaction parameters as for the runs in Figure 14).

neighborhood of the point (Yls, Y2s). From there it seems
to have a relatively smooth trip up the vertical leg, until
it finally “drops” into one of the horizontal grooves.
Precisely which groove the system phase point drops into
is a matter of chance, but once lodged in one of these
grooves it seems content to remain there for its quick trip
down the final, diagonal leg of the orbit.
Figure 15 shows a 50 rpd plot of four short simulation
runs, each having the same parameters (47) as in the
previous run, but each starting out at different points in
the Yi Y2 plane. As expected, no matter where we start out
in this plane the system phase point eventually winds up
on the clockwise limit cycle that we found in the previous
run. However, the system seems to have very definite ideas
as to just how it wants to approach the limit cycle: far
from just spiraling in or out to the limit cycle as one might
have naively expected, the system point seems again to be

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

number of Y1 molecules

Figure 18. Results of a stochastic simulation run of the Brusselator
with CiY = 5000, Y, = 1000, Y, = 2000, and a = 0.1, all plotted
at 100 rpd: (a) Y vs! f; (b) Y2 vs. f; (c) Y2 vs. YFigure 14a is roughly proportional to the time elapsed since
the previous rise. These observations would seem to

Stochastic Simulation of Coupled Chemical Reactions

2355

Figure 20. Same as Figure 19, except a

=

0.5.

constrained by the imaginary diagonal grooves in the Yx Y2
plane mentioned above.
As we observed in our calculations on the Lotka model,
it is very easy to modify our stochastic simulation program
so as to “open” or “close” the system to any particular
reactant species. As indicated in (44), the Brusselator is
normally considered to be open to both Xx and X2; indeed,
it is precisely this influx of Xx and X2 that drives the
oscillator.23 In Figures 16a and 16b we show what happens
when, given the parameter values in (47), we close the
system to Xx, and allow Xx to be depleted by reaction 44a
from an initial value of 106. In these two figures, the Xx
trajectory is plotted at 250 rpd while the Yx and Y2 trajectories are each plotted at 100 rpd. The Xx trajectory
simply falls exponentially according to the simple isomerization mechanism (cf. Figures 3-5); the darkened areas
along the Xx trajectory are “photographic burns” resulting
from the increased tempo of the reactions that accom-

panies the sudden changes in Yx and Y2. As the Xx
population decreases, the Yx and Y2 oscillations evidently
become less frequent but more violent; in this connection,
notice in Figure 16a that the Yx excursion time (i.e., the
length of the base of a Yx spike) stays constant. After the
last huge oscillation near t = 20, in which the Yx and Y2
population levels change by a factor of about 400, Yx never
rises again and Y2 never falls again. The time interval 0
< t < 35 shown in
Figures 16a-b contain approximately
1.45 X 106 reactions. The action terminates about 0.04 X
106 reactions later, at t = 213.4, with Xx = 0, Yx = 0, and
= 35344. In
Y2
Figure 17 we show what happens when the
system is open to Xx but closed to X2; i.e., Xx is again held
constant, but X2 is allowed to be depleted by reaction 44b.
In Figure 17 the X2 trajectory is plotted at 250 rpd, while
the Yx and Y2 trajectories are each plotted at 100 rpd. In
this case the system’s behavior is not nearly so exotic:
Starting out at 105, X2 quickly drops to zero—so rapidly
in fact that an oscillating pattern for Yx and Y2 does not
have time to fully develop. Y2, starting at 2000, decreases
to zero, while Yx eventually settles back to its initial value
1000; this final steady state is easily understood from eq
46.

A stability analysis of the deterministic reaction-rate
equations (45) by Lefever and Nicolis23 and also by Tyson24
predicts that the Brusselator should oscillate when the

inequality
c2X2
c3/2

c12X12

c4
|

c42

c3/2

(48)

is satisfied, and presumably should remain at the stationary values Yx< and Yx> in (46) otherwise.25 To test this
prediction, we first introduce a new parameter a defined
The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

number of Y1 molecules

Figure 21. Same as Figure 20, except a = 1.0. In (a), the upper
trajectory is Y2 and the lower trajectory is Yv

2356

Daniel T. Gillespie

by
2 c4/c2X2

a =

(49)

From now on, instead of specifying the Brusselator reactions by the four parameters cxXx, c2X2, c3, and c4 as in
(47), we shall use the four parameters, cxXh Yx, Y2>,’ and
a; this is permissible because, using (46) and (49)
CjXj cxXx
(50a)
~

c2X2 = 2cxXx/aYls
c3

=

(50b)

4c1X1/aYls2 Y2s

(50c)

=

c1X1/Y1s
(50d)
Inserting (50) into the oscillation criterion (48), we find
that this criterion assumes the somewhat simpler form
a < 2(1
Y1s/Y2s)
(51)
The significance of the new parametrization of the
Brusselator reactions is that cxXx controls the time scale
of the reactions, Yls and Y2b control the molecular population scales, and a controls the stability of the reactions.
For Y1b = 1000 and Y2> = 2000, as in the runs plotted
in Figures 14 and 15, the condition (51) for oscillatory
instability in the Brusselator is simply
=
« < 1
(Y2s
2Yls)
(52)
Since (49) implies that a = 0.2 for the parameter values
in (47), then the oscillations observed in Figures 14 and
15 tend to confirm this criterion. To check this out more
thoroughly, a series of six simulation runs was made with
Ylt = 1000 and Y2> = 2000, and with a assuming a succession of values from 1/10 to 10. The results of these runs
are plotted in Figures 18-23:
cxXx = 5000, Yi.= 1000, Y2s 2000,
a = 0.1
(Figure 18)
(53)
c4

-

Y2s

0.2

1000,
(Figure 19)

5000,
0.5

Yis = 1000,
(Figure 20)

Y2s

5000,
1.0

Yu 1000,
(Figure 21)

Y2s

5000,
2.0

1000,
(Figure 22)

Y2s

cxXx = 5000,
n

CjXi

=

=
=

a

cxX i

=

a

cxX i
a

=

=
=

cxXx = 5000,

10.0

Yis

=

=

Yis

=

=

(54)
=

2000,

=

Figure 22. Same as Figure 21, except a

=

2.0.

!

1

I

!

2000,

(57)

Yu 1000, Y2s= 2000,
(Figure 23)
=

(58)
All these runs start with Yx = 1000 and Y2 = 2000 at t =
a

5000

1

(56)
=

4000

3000

2000

2000,

(55)
=

1000

number of Y1 molecules

2000,

The plots all have 100 rpd and use the same scale on
the t axis; however, notice that Figures 18-20 use a different scale on the Yx and Y2 axes than Figures 21-23. The
a = 0.1 plots in Figure 18 show the results of about 2 X
106 reactions. The oscillations here are evidently quite
violent. Notice in particular the incredible abruptness of
the rises in Yx in Figure 18a and the concomitant falls in
Y2 in Figure 18b; e.g., near t = 10 the rise and fall lines
are virtually parallel to the vertical right borders of the
plots. Again we point out that this kind of rapid temporal
population excursion poses no special problems for our
stochastic simulation program. As we proceed from Figure
18 to 19 to 20, we observe that the amplitude of the oscillations decreases and their frequency increases, corresponding to the fact that a is moving closer to the critical
value at which we expect the oscillations to cease and
stability to set in. Figure 21 shows the behavior exactly
at the critical point a = 1; the system evidently still oscillates, but the oscillations are ragged and uneven. Figure
22 shows the behavior for a = 2, which is supposedly in
the stable, nonoscillating regime; however, we see in Figure
22a that the Yx and Y2 population levels, though holding

i
11

0.

The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

2

3

4

2000

5

7

6

3000

number of Y1 molecules

Figure 23. Same as Figure 22, except a

=

10.0.

8

9

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

=

2357

Stochastic Simulation of Coupled Chemical Reactions

number of Y2 molecules

fairly close to Yx< and Y2>, respectively, still exhibit no-

ticeable, anticorrelated excursions similar to those at the
critical point (cf. Figure 21a). When we increase a to 10,
in Figure 23, stability seems finally to be at hand.
IVD. The Oregonator. The Brusselator has been
criticized as being physically unrealistic on the grounds
that reaction 44c, requiring as it does a simultaneous
collision among two Yx molecules and a Y2 molecule, seems
rather improbable from a kinetic theory point of view.
However, Tyson and Light24 have shown that no set of
chemical reactions with only two intermediate species (Yx
and Y2) can exhibit limit cycle oscillations unless it
contains at least one reaction of order >3. Field and
Noyes26 have devised a model chemical oscillator which
circumvents this difficulty by introducing a third intermediate species (Y3); their model, which they have named
the Oregonator, is20

x, + Y2 ^ Y,

(59a)

Y, + Y2

Z,

(59b)

2Y, + Y3

(59c)

c,

—

X2 +

Y, —*
e4

2Y, -L. Z2
-

(59d)

Cc

X3 + Y3 —y2

(59e)

and evidently involves no reaction more complicated than

Figure 25. A 250 rpd plot in Y, Y2 Y3 space for four stochastic simulation
runs of the Oregonator (59), each run having the same reaction parameters as in Figure 24 but different initial values of Y,, Y2, and Y3.

bimolecular.27 Field and Noyes originally devised the
Oregonator as a highly idealized model of the BelousovZhabotinskii reactions, which involve the cerium ion
catalyzed oscillatory bromate oxidation of malonic acid.28
A much more complete and realistic model of the Belousov-Zhabotinskii reactions was developed by Field,
Koros, and Noyes,29 and that model has been convincingly
tested out by Edelson, Field, and Noyes30 through numerical integration of the corresponding reaction-rate
equations. Our objective here is much less ambitious: we
shall simply consider the Oregonator (59) as a chemical
system in its own right, and show that its dynamical
behavior for a given set of reaction parameters can be
The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

number of Y1 molecules

=
500, Y2j = 1000, Y3> = 2000,
Figure 24. Results of a 0.71 X 10e reaction stochastic simulation run of the Oregonator reactions (59), with Y,t
=
2000, and a2, = 50000 [see (61)]. (a) Combined 100 rpd plots of Y, (low-peaking curve), Y2 (middle-peaking curve), and Y3 (high-peaking
o',
< t < 6. (d) Projection of the trajectory
curve) vs. t for 0 <’ t < 6. (b) Same as (a), but for 1 < t < 3. (c) A 250 rpd plot in Y, Y2 Y3 space for 0
in (c) onto the Y, Y2 plane, (e) Projection of the trajectory in (c) onto the Y, Y3 plane, (f) Projection of the trajectory in (c) onto the Y2 Y3 plane.

2358

Daniel T. Gillespie

values for the five auxiliary parameters Y1>( Y2g, Y3i, pls, and
This is a convenient way to proceed because, by
p2s.
working with the parameters YX(, Y^, and Y3s, we can more
directly control the scales of the molecular population
levels of the various species.31 Similar considerations

motivated our reparametrization of the Brusselator reaction constants in (50).
Following the procedure outlined in Figure 2, a stochastic simulation computer program was written for the
Oregonator (putting M = 5, N = 3, Xx = Yx, X2 = Y2, X3
=

Y3, hi

=

XxY2, h2 = YxY2, hs = X2Yx, h4 = Yx(Yx

and h5 = X3Y3). Taking

Yu

=

-

l)/2

500, Y2s 1000, Y3s 2000, pls =
2000, p2s 50000
(Figures 24-27)
(62)
the corresponding reaction parameters were calculated
from (61), and a stochastic simulation run was made with
Yj, Y2, and Y3 initially set to the nominal steady-state
values 500, 1000, and 2000, respectively. The results of
this simulation run, which contained approximately 0.71
X 106 reactions, are shown in Figures 24a-f. Figure 24a
is a 100 rpd plot of all three intermediate species vs. time.
Just as we found in the Brusselator [cf. Figures 14a and
14b], the population levels quickly move away from the
initial steady-state values and begin to oscillate vigorously
in an apparently regular and stable manner.
The lowpeaking curve in Figure 24a is the Yx trajectory, the
middle-peaking curve is the Y2 trajectory, and the highpeaking curve is the Y3 trajectory. To show the details of
the cycling more clearly, the time interval 1 < t < 3 is
shown on a horizontally expanded scale in Figure 24b
(which is also a 100 rpd plot). The cycling behavior shown
here is quite consistent with the interpretation of Field and
Noyes:26 When the Y2 molecular population level is high
and the Yx and Y3 molecular population levels are low,
=

=

=

middle-peaking, and high-peaking curves are

Y2, and Ys respectively.

Figure 27. Showing what would have happened in the run of Figure
24 if the system had been closed to species X2. All trajectories are
plotted at 100 rpd. The heavy decaying curve is X2, and the low-peaking,
middle-peaking, and high-peaking curves are Y,, Y2, and V3, re-

spectively.

numerically calculated with our stochastic simulation
procedure.
To help guide us in assigning numerical values to the
five reaction parameters cxXx, c2, c3X2, c4, and c5X3, we
begin by writing the deterministic reaction-rate equations
for the Oregonator:
d Yj/df cxXx Y2 c2 Yj Y2 + C3X2 Yx
=

-

-

(60a)

2(c4/2) Yx2

dY2/df
dY3/df

=

-c,X, Y2

-

c2 Yi Y2 + c5X3 Y3

(60b)

c3X2Yx-csX3Y3
(60c)
If Yx, Y2s, and Y^ are the values of Yh Y2, and Y3 for which
dYx/df dY2/dt = dY3/dt 0 and if px< and p2s are the
deterministic reaction rates of the first two reactions (59a)
and (59b) when these steady-state values obtain, i.e.
Pis-CiXxY2s and p2s c2YlsY2s
then it is not difficult to show from (60) that
p Xs / Y2s
CXXX
(61a)
P 2s / YXs Y2s
c2
(61b)
c3X2 (p Is + P2s)/YXs
(61c)
C4
2Pls/Yls2
(61d)
CsX3
(p is + P2s)/Y3s
(61e)
Therefore, one way to specify values for the five reaction
parameters cxXx, c2, c3X2, c4, and c5X3 is to first specify
=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

reactions 59a and 59b dominate and act to slowly decrease
the Y2 population level; when the Y2 population is finally
reduced below a certain critical level (evidently in the
neighborhood of 1000 according to Figure 24b), reaction
59c becomes momentarily dominant and produces a rapid
increase in the Yx and Y3 population levels; this increase
in Yj and Y3 in turn stimulates reaction 59d, which pulls
Yx down again, and reaction 59e, which pulls Y3 down and
pushes Y2 back up.
The cycle trajectories in Yx Y2Y3 space are plotted at 250
rpd in Figure 24c. As we found in the Brusselator [cf.
Figure 14c], we note that on some portions of the limit
cycle the system phase point cannot consistently retrace
its previous path. This seems to occur most prominently
at the higher population levels, and is evidenced also in
Figure 24a by the irregular variations in the peak heights
of the Yx, Y2, and Y3 curves. Although obviously due to
random microscopic fluctuations, the overall effect is too
large to be labeled microscopic. One possible explanation
for this behavior might be that the cycling serves to
transmit the relative fluctuations at the lower molecular
population levels directly to the higher molecular population levels, where they are then much larger than would
normally be expected. Figures 24d-f are 250 rpd plots of
the projections of the phase trajectory onto the three phase
planes; Figure 24d emphasizes the peculiarly warped shape
of the limit cycle orbit in YXY2Y3 space.
Figure 25 is a 250 rpd plot of four short simulation runs
which have the same parameters as in (62) but different
starting points in Yx Y2Y3 space; evidently, no matter where
the starting point is taken, the system eventually winds
up orbiting the same limit cycle path that was found in
Figure 24c.
Figure 26 is a 100 rpd plot showing what happens when,

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

24 if the system had been closed to species Xv All trajectories are
plotted at 100 rpd. The decaying curve is X,, and the low-peaking,

Stochastic Simulation of Coupled Chemical Reactions

2359

for the parameters in (62), the system is closed to species
Xi, and the Xx population level is allowed to be depleted
by reaction 59a from an initial value of 104. The upper
curve is the X1 trajectory, and the low-peaking, middle-

pXs

pXs
pXs

=

2000,

=

4000,

=

5000,

p2s

=

20000

(Figure 28)

(63)

p2s

=

20000

(Figure 29)

(64)

=

5000

(Figure 30)

(65)

p2s

Comparing these figures with their identically plotted
counterparts in Figures 24a and 24c (which are for pXa =
2000 and p2, = 50000) shows that, as the ratio px„/p2a is
increased from 0.04 to 1.00, the regular oscillations dissolve
into random microscopic fluctuations about the nominal
steady-state levels.
Finally, to investigate the effects of moving somewhat
closer to the high molecular population levels realized
experimentally, we made a stochastic simulation run of the
Oregonator in which all the population levels were uniformly increased by a factor of 4 over the run plotted in
Figure 24. This was accomplished by choosing the reaction
parameter values so that, in contrast to (62)
Yls = 2000,

Y2s

2000, p2s

=

4000,
50000
=

8000,
(Figure 31)
Y3s

=

pXs

Figure 28. Same as Figures 24a and 24c, except that p1a = 2000
and p2> = 20000.

=

(66)

Figure 31a is a 500 rpd plot showing the details of the
cycling, and is to be compared with Figure 24b. Figure 31b
is a 1000 rpd plot of the phase trajectory in YXY2Y3 space,
and is to be compared with Figure 24c. Evidently, the only
significant difference between these plots is the fourfold
increase in the molecular population levels, and an accompanying decrease in the relative size of the random,
microscopic fluctuations. Especially noteworthy is the fact
that the curious “spreading” of the limit cycle path in
YxY2Y3 space does not seem to have been appreciably
reduced; certainly, this spreading is much greater than the
microscopic fluctuations on the individual orbits. The
fourfold increase in the molecular population levels in this
run was attended by a fourfold increase in the numbers
of reactions per cycle, and hence a fourfold increase in the
execution time of the computer simulation program:
Figure 31b shows the results of approximately 2.8 X 106
reactions, which cost about $80 to simulate to the Univac

b

1110.

Figure 29. Same as Figures 24a and 24c, except that p1s = 4000
and p2i = 20000.

In view of the consistency between Figures 24b and 31a,
and between Figures 24c and 31b, there would seem to be

little point to increasing the molecular population levels
any further. In this connection, it should be recognized
The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

peaking, and high-peaking curves are as before the Yx, Y2,
and Y3 trajectories, respectively. The waves in the Xx
trajectory are caused by the Y2 variations through reaction
59a. As X1 decreases, the Yx and Y3 oscillations occur
farther apart in time, but the shape of their peaks evidently
remains unaffected. The oscillation near t = 3.4 is the
system’s last gasp; the action terminates at t = 11.5 with
Xx = Yj = Y3 = 0 and Y2 = 4470. Figure 27 is a 100 rpd
plot showing what happens when we close the system to
X2 instead of Xu and allow the X2 population level to be
depleted by reaction 59c from an initial value of 105, The
waves in the X2 trajectory are caused by the Yx variations
through reaction 59c. In this case we see that the oscillations just slowly die out altogether. By time t = 6, about
0.25 X 106 reactions have occurred; the action finally stops
about 0.06 X 106 reactions later, at t = 218, with Yx = Y2
=
=
0 and X2 = 65.
Y3
Figures 28-30 show the effect of changing the Oregonator reaction parameters in such a way that the limit cycle
oscillations are made to disappear. These figures show
three separate simulation runs, all with YXs = 500, Y2j =
1000, Y3j = 2000 as in the previous runs, but with the other
two parameters pXs and p2s set as follows:

2360

Daniel T. Gillespie

Figure 30. Same as Figures 24a and 24c, except that p,s =
and p2s = 5000.

5000

that it is not necessarily desirable to scale the molecular
population levels so high that all trajectories appear to be

devoid of random fluctuations. Such fluctuations should
be regarded as an intrinsically real aspect of the dynamical
behavior of a chemically reacting system, not as some
imperfection in our observational technique that ought to
be eliminated. Indeed, part of the utility of our stochastic
simulation procedure is that it affords us a unique opportunity to examine these fluctuations in a wide variety
of controlled situations.

V. Concluding Remarks

This paper has described and ilustrated the use of a
novel method for numerically calculating the time evolution of a spatially homogeneous system of coupled
chemical reactions. This “stochastic simulation algorithm”
has been shown to be physically and mathematically
well-grounded from a kinetic theory point of view, and
rigorously equivalent to the spatially homogeneous master
equation, yet surprisingly simple and straightforward to
implement on a digital computer. The principle advantages and limitations of the algorithm have been summarized in section HID. Suffice it here to say that the
specific applications considered in section IV demonstrate
quite convincingly both the feasibility and the potential
usefulness of this computational approach.
A comparison of the relative advantages of the stochastic
simulation algorithm with those of the traditional method
of numerically solving the deterministic reaction-rate
equations is perhaps inevitable, and strong points can be
scored on both sides. However, it would seem more fruitful
to focus on the complementary aspects of these two
computational methods instead of the competitive aspects.
From this point of view, each method represents a tool,
with specific advantages and limitations, which the
The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

Figure 31. Showing the effects of increasing all molecular population
levels In the Oregonator by a factor of 4 over their values in Figure
=
24: V1t = 2000, Y2i = 4000, Y^ = 8000, pu = 2000, and
p2i
50000. (a) A 500 rpd plot of Y1 (low-peaking curve), Y2 (middle-peaking
curve), and Y3 (high-peaking curve) vs. t for 4 < f < 12 (of. Figure
24b). (b) A 1000 rpd plot of the trajectory in Y^Y2Y3 space for 0 <
t < 24 (cf. Figure 24c).

chemical kineticist may employ at his discretion to elucidate the temporal behavior of a chemically reacting
system.
As presented here, the stochastic simulation algorithm
is applicable only to spatially homogeneous systems. Work
toward extending the algorithm to accommodate molecular
diffusion in spatially inhomogeneous systems is currently
in progress, and will be reported on at a later date.

Acknowledgment. The numerical results reported in
this paper were calculated on the NWC Central Computing
Facility’s Univac 1110 computer, and were plotted with
their versatile DISSPLA/FR-80 computerized plotting
system; the author is especially grateful to Hans Lindblom
of the CCF for his helpful guidance in the use of the latter.
The author acknowledges with thanks some fruitful discussions and correspondence with Dr. Dan Walls and Dr.
Crispin Gardiner of the University of Waikato, and also
some clarifying remarks by Professor N. G. van Kampen
and Dr. G. Nicolis. Finally, the author takes special
pleasure in expressing his gratitude to his wife Carol, whose
generous advice in her capacity as a professional scientific
programmer made the author’s efforts on the computer
much more productive and enjoyable than they would have
been otherwise.

References and Notes
(1) D. T. Gillespie, J. Comput. Phys., 22, 403 (1976).
(2) In going from (2a) to (2b), and also from (3b) to (3c), it might appear
that we are suggesting that an imminent collision is possible even
between two molecules that are very far apart. However, this is
not implied here. For a detailed discussion of this point, see D. T.
Gillespie, J. Stat. Phys., 16, 311 (1977).

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

b

Stochastic Simulation of Coupled Chemical Reactions
(3) D. A. McQuarrie, J. Appl. Prob., 4, 413 (1967).
(4) This average Is equivalent to the "ensemble average" that was
denoted by angular brackets in eq 5a and 6b.
(5) It Is considered implicit in (4) that the probability for more than one
reaction to occur in dfis of order >1 in df, and is therefore effectively
zero. Thus, between times fand f + df, either no reactions will occur,
or else some one of the M RM reactions will occur.
(6) The reaction-rate equations (eq 1) have only one independent variable,
namely, the continuous variable f; however, the master equation (eq
13) has N+ 1 independent variables, namely the N discrete variables
X1.....XN and the one continuous variable f.
(7) For a somewhat more rigorous version of the foregoing arguments,
see

section III of ref 1.

of computer.

(9) For a detailed discussion of this general procedure, see Chapter 2
of D. T. Gillespie, NWC Technical Paper No. 5714 ("The Monte Carlo
Method of Evaluating Integrals”), Naval Weapons Center, China Lake,
Calif., 1975. [Available from National Technical Information Service,

Springfield, Va. 22161; not available directly from the author,]
(10) T. Nakanlshi, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 32, 1313 (1972). See also T.
Nakanishi, ibid., 40, 1232 (1976).
(11) D. L. Bunker, B. Garrett, T. Klelndienst, and G. S. Long, III, Combust.
Flame, 23, 373 (1974),
(12) The discrete character of our r-selection process is not a result of
any approximation scheme, but merely a consequence of the fact
that any bounded chemical system contains a finite number of
molecules.
(13) M. Malek-Mansour and G. Nicolis, J. Stat. Phys., 13, 197 (1975).
(14) R. Gortz and D. F. Walls, Z. Phys., B25, 423 (1976). See also R.
Gortz, J. Phys. A, 9, 1089 (1976).
(15) D. F. Walls, private communication.
(16) G. Nicolis, J. Stat. Phys., 6, 195 (1972).
(17) R. Mazo, J. Chem. Phys., 62, 4244 (1975).
(18) A. Nitzan and J. Ross, J. Stat. Phys., 10, 379 (1974).
(19) Y. Kuramoto, Prog. Theor. Phys., 49, 1782 (1973).
(20) A bar over any reactant species signifies that its molecular population
is assumed to remain constant; the system Is said to be "open" to
that species.
(21) A. J. Lotka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 42,1595 (1920); Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S., 6, 410 (1920).
(22) For a comprehensive review of Volterra’s and other nonlinear models
of interacting populations, see N. S. Goel, S. C. Maltra, and E. W.
Montroll, Rev. Mod. Phys., 43, 231 (1971).
(23) I. Prigogine and R. Lefever, J. Chem. Phys., 48, 1695 (1968); R.
Lefever and G. Nicolis, J. Theor. Biol., 30, 267 (1971); G. Nicolis,
Adv. Chem. Phys., 19, 209 (1971).
(24) J. J. Tyson, J. Chem. Phys., 58, 3919 (1973); J. J. Tyson and J.
C. Light, ibid., 59, 4164 (1973).
(25) Condition (48) Was obtained from eq 2 and 5 of J. J. Tyson, J. Chem.
Phys., 58, 3919 (1973).
(26) R. J. Field and R. M. Noyes, J. Chem. Phys., 60, 1877 (1973).
-*
Y2, where
(27) Field and Noyes actually write the fifth reaction as fY3
f is a “stoichiometric factor” which is introduced in an attempt to
obtain a better correspondence with the real Belousov-Zhabotinskii
reactions. In most cases, as here, /is simply taken as unity. The
“reversible Oregonator” has been discussed by R. J. Field, J. Chem.
Phys., 63, 2289 (1975); the "closed Oregonator” has been discussed
by R. M. Noyes, J. Chem. Phys., 64, 1266 (1976).
(28) B. P. Belousov, Sb. Ref. Radiat. Med., 1958, 145 (1959); A. M.
Zhabotinskll, “Oscillatory Processes in Biological and Chemical
Systems”, Science Publishers, Moscow, 1967, p 149.
(29) R. J. Field, E. Kdros, and R. M. Noyes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 94, 8649
(1972).
(30) D. Edelson, R. J. Field, and R. M. Noyes, Int. J. Chem. Kin., 7, 417
(1975).

(31) From our point of view, eq 61 do not assume the validity of the
deterministic reaction-rate equations (eq 60); rather, they simply offer
an alternate parametrization of the Oregonator reaction constants.

Discussion
W. C. Gardiner, Jr. (University of Texas). (1) Your stochastic
algorithm involves substantially more operations per “integration
cycle” (one more call to URN and one to ALOG) than the
procedure published by Bunker and co-workers (Combust. Flame,
1974). What does your procedure gain from this extra work? (2)
What is the largest ratio of species concentrations that can
reasonably be handled in a practical application of your routine?
D. T. Gillespie: (1) The relationship between my stochastic
simulation algorithm and the procedure of Bunker et al. (ref 11)
is discussed in section HID of this paper, and also on p 429 of
ref 1. The main point is that my method is fully equivalent to
the spatially homogeneous master equation, whereas the method
of Bunker et al. is not. Therefore, a more appropriate question
would be: “Under what conditions may one replace, in step 2 of
Figure 2, the statement t = (l/aQ) In (l/r{) with the simpler
statement t = (l/a0), without introducing sensible alterations in
the computational results?” I think it should certainly be possible
to make this replacement when one is calculating the mean and
variance of a stable or metastable state, as described in connection
with eq 34 and 37; in fact, for that type of calculation one could
probably just dispense with t altogether. However, for calculating
a system’s transient behavior, I do not see how one could confidently answer this question except empirically on a case-by-case
basis. I am sure that for many situations the shorter expression
for t would prove to be adequate; but notice, for example, that
it could not be used for the simple isomerization reaction 22 if
one were interested in studying fluctuations. I have made no study
of this matter in these initial calculations, essentially taking the
position that the a priori assurance of being rigorously correct,
which comes with using the longer expression for t, is worth the
fractional increase in computer running time.
(2) The runs plotted in Figures 16 and 18 are “reasonable”,
and show relative population ratios that span roughly four orders
of magnitude. Of course, the fundamental limitation on this
procedure is not the population ratios per se, but rather the total
number of individual reaction events that must be simulated in
order to cover the time span of interest. At typical charging rates
on the Univac 1110,1 found a rough rule of thumb to be $30 per
106 reactions. The runs plotted in Figures 16 and 18 contain
between 1 and 2 X 106 reactions each.

Robert J. Gelinas (Science Applications, Inc.). I must take
exception to the remarks made subsequent to Gillespie’s talk by
Professor Shuler, and the other allowed questioner, disparaging
Gillespie’s method. Gillespie’s general method has strong
foundations in quantum kinetic theory and in corresponding
Langevin analysis which were not discussed. His imaginative
reaction accounting method is to conventional statistical approaches based on species concentrations, as second quantization
is to first quantization in quantum theory. I cannot vouch for
his algebra at this time, but his basic method Is worthy of positive
acknowledgment and encouragement. As with the origination
of many new creative ideas, time is required to develop a veneer
against unwarranted criticism. It would certainly be a disservice
to discourage further pursuit of Gillespie’s work at this early time.

The Journal of Physical Chemistry, Vol. 81, No. 25, 1977

Downloaded from pubs.​acs.​org/​jpchax/​article-pdf/​81/​25/​2340/​11115241/​j100540a008.​pdf by FRIEDRICH-ALEXANDER-UNIV user on 30 September 2026

(8) The art of writing reliable unit-interval uniform random number
generators is quite involved, and is best left to the experts; see, for
example, D. E. Knuth, “The Art of Computer Programming”, Vol. 2,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1969, and also G. Marsaglia and
T. A. Bray, Commun. Assoc. Comput. Mach., 11, 757 (1968). It
is Important to note that these generators, even those written in
Fortran, are usually machine dependent-, a Fortran generator written
for one kind of computer will seldom work properly on another kind

2361

