Molecular Cell

Short Article
The Incoherent Feedforward Loop Can Provide
Fold-Change Detection in Gene Regulation
Lea Goentoro,1 Oren Shoval,2 Marc W. Kirschner,1,* and Uri Alon2,*
1Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
2Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel
*Correspondence: marc@hms.harvard.edu (M.W.K.), urialon@weizmann.ac.il (U.A.)
DOI 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.11.018

SUMMARY

Many sensory systems (e.g., vision and hearing) show
a response that is proportional to the fold-change in
the stimulus relative to the background, a feature
related to Weber’s Law. Recent experiments suggest
such a fold-change detection feature in signaling
systems in cells: a response that depends on the
fold-change in the input signal, and not on its absolute level. It is therefore of interest to find molecular
mechanisms of gene regulation that can provide
such fold-change detection. Here, we demonstrate
theoretically that fold-change detection can be
generated by one of the most common network
motifs in transcription networks, the incoherent feedforward loop (I1-FFL), in which an activator regulates
both a gene and a repressor of the gene. The foldchange detection feature of the I1-FFL applies to
the entire shape of the response, including its amplitude and duration, and is valid for a wide range of
biochemical parameters.
INTRODUCTION
Gene regulation networks are composed of a small set of
recurring interaction patterns called network motifs (Milo et al.,
2002; Shen-Orr et al., 2002). Each motif has been experimentally
found to perform specific dynamical functions (reviewed in Alon,
2007). In cases studied so far, these motifs seem to preserve
their autonomous functions even in their natural contexts, wired
into the regulatory networks of the cell.
One of the most common network motifs is the incoherent
type-1 feedforward loop (I1-FFL), which appears hundreds of
times in bacteria (Eichenberger et al., 2004; Mangan et al.,
2006; Milo et al., 2002) and in yeast (Lee et al., 2002; Milo
et al., 2002). In animal cells, the I1-FFL has been discovered in
the transcriptional networks of human embryonic stem cell
(Boyer et al., 2005) and hematopoietic stem cell (Swiers et al.,
2006) and downstream of the Notch signaling pathway (Krejci
et al., 2009).
An I1-FFL is a regulatory pattern in which an activator X
controls a target gene Z and also activates a repressor of that
target gene, Y. The repressor Y may be a transcription factor,
or microRNA, such as found in c-Myc/E2F1 regulation

(O’Donnell et al., 2005) and in eye patterning in Drosophila
(Li et al., 2009). Previous studies have demonstrated that the
I1-FFL can generate a temporal pulse of Z response (Basu
et al., 2004; Mangan and Alon, 2003; Mangan et al., 2006), accelerate the response time of Z (Mangan and Alon, 2003; Mangan
et al., 2006), and act as a band-pass amplitude filter that
provides maximal Z response for intermediate levels of X activity
(Entus et al., 2007; Kaplan et al., 2008; Kim et al., 2008).
Here, we demonstrate an additional function for the I1-FFL:
the I1-FFL can generate a response to fold-changes in the input
signal, rather than absolute levels. This fold-change detection
property means that the dynamics of the output (amplitude
and duration of the transcription of gene Z) depend only on the
relative change in input signal, not on its absolute levels. Figure 1
provides an example: a signal that changes from, say, level 1 to 2
provides exactly the same output as a signal that goes from 2 to
4 because both represent a 2-fold increase in input. In contrast,
a nonfold detection system results in different outputs for these
two step stimuli.
Evidence for such fold-change responsiveness was recently
demonstrated in mammalian signaling systems. In the Wnt
signaling pathway, Goentoro and Kirschner (2009 [this issue of
Molecular Cell]) present evidence that gene expression and the
embryonic phenotype appear to correlate with fold-changes,
rather than absolute levels, of the activator b-catenin. In the
ERK signaling system, Cohen-Saidon and colleagues (2009
[this issue of Molecular Cell]) present evidence that fold-changes
in nuclear ERK (the activator X in our notation), as opposed
to its absolute levels, are the more precise outcome of ligand
stimulation.
Reading fold-changes intuitively requires that cells remember
the past activity level of the transcription factor and compare it
to the present level after stimulation. This comparison has to
extend the entire duration of the dynamics (both transient
and steady state) if the target gene’s dynamics are to be
entirely dependent only on fold-changes in the transcription
factor, and not on absolute levels. Current models of gene
regulation do not show this property. This study demonstrates
that such a perfect temporal comparison is theoretically
feasible and that the almost minimal circuit to accomplish
this temporal comparison happens to be one of the recurrent
motifs in transcriptional networks, the type-1 incoherent feedforward loop.
The fold-change detection property occurs for a wide range of
biochemical parameters for the I1-FFL interactions, provided
that the activator is in its linear regime, and the repressor

894 Molecular Cell 36, 894–899, December 11, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

Molecular Cell
Fold-Change Detection in Gene Regulation

RESULTS

Figure 1. Fold-Change Detection
Fold-change detection means that the dynamics of the output (amplitude and
duration of the transcription of gene Z) depend only on the fold-changes in the
level of the input signal, and not on the absolute levels of the input signal.

saturates the promoter of the target gene (Z). The fold-change
detection property of the I1-FFL can provide gene regulation
with an analog of Weber’s Law, a feature of many sensory
systems (e.g., vision, smell, hearing, taste, and touch), in which
signal discrimination is relative to the background signal
(Laming, 1986; Ross and Murray, 1996; Weber, 1905). Foldchange detection may help cells maintain sensitivity to noisy
signals across a wide dynamic range and perhaps cope with
variation in the regulatory protein concentrations.

The Incoherent Feedforward Loop with Strong
Repression Responds to Fold-Changes in Signal
For illustration, Figure 2A shows how simple gene regulation, in
which a transcription factor X activates transcription of a target
gene Z, responds to input steps. In simple regulation, the amount
of Z produced depends directly on the absolute level of the
transcription factor X. The more transcription factor is around,
the more Z is produced. A higher basal level of X corresponds
to a higher basal transcription of Z (dashed lines).
In contrast, we now demonstrate that the I1-FFL, with proper
design of its regulatory elements, can show a different type of
response: the output Z depends on the fold-change in the input,
and not on its absolute levels.
In the I1-FFL, a transcription factor X activates a target gene Z
and also activates Y, which represses Z (Figure 2B). We consider
here the case in which Y represses Z strongly (Y nearly saturates
the Z promoter) and X acts in a linear fashion (X is far from
saturating the Y and Z promoters; equations 1 and 2 in Figure 3).
In this case, we find that the response of Z depends only on the
fold-change in the level of the activator X, and not on its absolute
levels.
To demonstrate fold-change detection, we provide two input
steps that have an identical fold-change but different absolute
levels (Figure 2B, X, solid and dashed lines). We find that the
response of Z is a pulse that shows exact adaptation to its basal
level. The shape of the pulse is identical for both input steps
(Figure 2B, Z, the solid and dashed lines overlap). The height
and duration of the response thus depend on fold-changes
in input, and not on its absolute levels. Variation in the basal activity
level of the transcription factor X can be completely compensated,
such that gene transcription depends only on the fold-changes.
Figure 2. The Incoherent Feedforward Loop
Can Provide Fold-Change Detection
(A) In simple gene regulation, two inputs with
different absolute levels but identical fold-changes
give two different profiles of Z transcription.
(B) In a properly designed I1-FFL (see text), two
inputs with different absolute levels but identical
fold-changes give two identical profiles of Z transcription (dashed and full lines overlap).
(C and D) The amplitude and duration of the
response Z can be increased by slowing the
dynamics of Y (C) or by introducing a delay in
the response of Y to X (D).
In all of the plots, time is in arbitrary units. Using
typical biochemical rate constants, the response
time is in the range of minutes to hours (see text).
The plots were generated using equations 7 and
8 in Figure 3 with r = 0.1, except in (C), in which r
varies.

Molecular Cell 36, 894–899, December 11, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 895

Molecular Cell
Fold-Change Detection in Gene Regulation

Figure 3. Mathematical Description of the
Incoherent Feedforward Loop as a FoldChange Detector

The I1-FFL circuit with fold-change detection can maintain
equal responses to a series of stimuli with identical steps
(Figure S1 available online). Such a property can be useful in
case the old signal is not cleared before the cells need to
respond to a new stimulus. Our examples so far included sharp
steps in X, but fold response is also seen for gradually changing
signal profiles (Figure S1). For illustration, Figure S2 shows
how all other network motifs, including positive and negative
autoregulation, coherent FFLs, and single-input modules,
respond to the absolute levels of the input.
Fold-Change Detection in I1-FFL Arises Because
the Repressor Y Acts as a Memory of the Activator X
The intuitive reason for the fold-change detection property of the
I1-FFL is that the repressor Y acts as a memory of the activator X
(Friedland et al., 2009; Gardner et al., 2000). The I1-FFL with
strong repression allows Y to act as a reference memory of
previous levels of X and to normalize the activation of Z accordingly. In this manner, Y mediates a continual temporal comparison between the present and past levels of X. At long timescales, the memory is adjusted to the new level of the activator
X, and the response Z returns to its basal level (Figure 2C).
Mathematically, fold-change detection can be seen via
dimensional analysis. The dynamic equations for Y and Z can
be rescaled so that the stimulus X drops out, and only the foldchange in input level, F(t) = X(t) / X0, drives the dynamics of Z
(equations 7–9 in Figure 3). In a special case, an analytical
solution can be obtained that explicitly shows the strict dependence on fold-changes in the input (see Supplemental Data).
Tuning the Duration and Amplitude
of Fold-Change Detection
The timescales for the dynamics of Z can be tuned to range from
minutes to hours to days by changing the degradation rates of Y
and Z (a1 and a2 in equations 3 and 4 in Figure 3). The time to

reach the peak of the response is on the
order of the half-life of the repressor Y,
and the time for Z to adapt back to basal
levels is on the order of the half-life of Z.
The amplitude of the Z response can be
tuned in two ways. First, the slower the
dynamics of the repressor Y compared
to the dynamics of the target Z, the higher
the amplitude of the response (Figure 4C).
This may occur, for example, when the
repressor is a relatively stable protein or
inhibitory RNA, and Z is an unstable
protein or mRNA.
Second, the amplitude and duration of
the response is increased when a time
delay is incorporated so that Y is activated by X at a delay relative to Z
(Figure 4D). Such a delay in expression of a target gene is seen
in diverse systems (e.g., Mdm2 expression is delayed by 100
min relative to other genes activated by the same factor, p53)
(Lahav et al., 2004). Such delays can be differentially controlled
for different genes by controlling delays in transcription, translation, localization, splicing, and so on.
Fold-Change Detection Occurs for a Wide Range
of Parameters in the I1-FFL
Up until now, we examined a model of the I1-FFL that is in the
limit within which Y saturates the Z promoter and X is linear
for the X and Z promoters (equation 2 in Figure 3). To go beyond
this limiting case, we tested the behavior of a more complete
model of the I1-FFL. In this model, standard MichaelisMenten-like terms describe the action of X and Y on the
promoters (equation 1 in Figure 3) (Alon, 2007; Bintu et al.,
2005).
We tested the model by varying its biochemical parameters
(binding affinities, degradation rates, and production rates). We
considered three possible types of mechanisms for the way
that the two regulators X and Y bind the Z promoter: (1) binding
of X and Y is mutually exclusive; (2) binding of X and Y is independent; and (3) binding of X and Y is cooperative. For each set of
biochemical parameters, we computed the response to two
step stimuli with different absolute levels but identical fold-changes (Figure 5A).
In all three cases, there is a range of parameters that provides
good fold-change detection (Figures 5B–5D). The light-colored
region in Figures 5B–5D indicates the range of parameters in
which the response to the two step stimuli is identical to within
10%. The lower panel of Figure 5 shows examples of Z dynamics
across the parameter range. This suggests that the I1-FFL can
be designed to show fold-change detection in a way that does
not require fine-tuning of parameter values and only requires
that certain parameter ratios are large.

896 Molecular Cell 36, 894–899, December 11, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

Molecular Cell
Fold-Change Detection in Gene Regulation

Figure 4. I1-FFL Shows Fold-Change
Detection over a Wide Range of Parameters
(A) Model parameters were varied. For each
choice of parameters, we provided two step inputs
with the same fold-change, F = 10, and different
absolute levels, X00 = 10 X0. As a measure of the
fold-change detection property, we computed
the relative difference (3) in the amplitude of the Z
response (Zmax) for the two step inputs.
(B–D) Three detailed designs of the Z promoter
input function were considered, in which binding
of X and Y is exclusive (B), independent (C), or
cooperative (D). In all cases, the light region indicates the parameter range in which fold-change
detection occurs, in the sense that the two step
inputs produce identical outputs within 10%
(contour line delineates 3 = 0.1).
Parameters: Ki are binding constants, X0 is the
basal input level, and Y0 = b1X0/a1, with b1 and
a1 defined in equation 3 in Figure 3.

The parameter range for fold-change detection is greatest for
the case in which X and Y binding is mutually exclusive. In this
case, fold-change detection requires only that Y saturates the
Z promoter (Y0/K2 >> 1, Figure 5B). If both X and Y can bind
the promoter such that their binding is independent of each
other, fold-change detection requires also that X activation of
the Z promoter is linear (X0/K1 << 1, Figure 5C). If X and Y bind
cooperatively, fold-change detection requires further that the
simultaneous binding of both activators be relatively rare
compared to the binding of Y alone (X0Y0/K3 << 1, Figure 5D).
In short, fold-change detection requires that the ratio of Y
concentration to its effective binding constant to the Z promoter
is large, Y/K > 10. This can be achieved either by having high
levels of Y, say Y = 100 nM and affinity K = 10 nM, or lower levels
of Y and higher affinity, Y = 10 nM and K = 1 nM. (For reference,
note that 10 nM represents 10 molecules in a bacterium and
1000 molecules in a fibroblast nucleus). In the cases considered here, fold-change detection also requires that X be in the
linear regime in regulating the Y promoter.
Because Y strongly represses the promoter, fold-change
detection operates at a small fraction of the promoter’s maximal
strength. An appropriate combination of a strong promoter and
strong repression can be used to provide the needed expression
level of the output gene Z.
The present simulations indicate that the I1-FFL can also be
designed in such a way that it does not show fold-change
detection properties. This is expected if X is not in its linear
regime or if cooperative binding of X and Y to the Z promoter
is near saturation. In these cases, the I1-FFL shows either
a response that depends on the absolute level of the input or
a weak response.

We also tested a different way of implementing an I1-FFL. Here, instead of acting
as a transcriptional repressor, Y promotes
degradation of the target gene Z (Levchenko and Iglesias, 2002; Tyson et al.,
2003). This is also similar to the ‘‘proportioner’’ node in the adapting circuits discussed in Ma et al.
(2009). With appropriate choice of parameters, we find that this
version of the I1-FFL can also show fold-change detection
(Figure S3).
It is likely that additional circuits can provide fold-change
detection. One possible direction is integral feedback circuits
that provide precise adaptation (Barkai and Leibler, 1997; Ma
et al., 2009; Yi et al., 2000). Not all circuits with precise adaptation, however, are expected to show fold-change detection.
Figure 4 (lower-left curves in lower panels) shows parameters
in which I1-FFL displays almost precise adaptation but poor
fold-change detection.
DISCUSSION
This study suggests that the I1-FFL, a common network motif,
can provide fold-change detection. Fold-change detection
means that the amplitude and duration and indeed the entire
shape of the response depend on the fold changes in the input,
and not on its absolute levels. Fold-change detection occurs
for a wide range of biochemical parameters of the I1-FFL, in
which the repressor saturates its promoter and the activator
works in the linear regime.
Are there advantages to fold-change detection, rather than
absolute detection, in gene regulation circuitry? One can
suggest at least two advantages related to cellular variation in
the concentration of transcription factors and to rapidly varying
noise in their activity level (Figure 5).
The first potentially useful property of fold-change detection
regards the observation that the nuclear level of transcription
factors can vary by several-fold between individual cells

Molecular Cell 36, 894–899, December 11, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 897

Molecular Cell
Fold-Change Detection in Gene Regulation

Figure 5. Fold-Change Detection May
Provide Signaling Advantages in Noisy Environment
(A) Fold-change detection ensures that each cell
responds reliably to an external signal despite variation in the basal level of X. In fold-change detection, cells sense relative changes from the basal
level, and not absolute levels or absolute changes.
(B) Fold-change detection rescales the meaningful
change in signal according to the background
noise. In fold-change detection, DX = 1 when
background X = 1 gives the same information as
DX = 10 when background X = 10.
(C) Fold-change detection in the I1-FFL can
provide a transcriptional analog of Weber’s Law
in sensory system, which states that the minimal
detectable change in signal scales linearly with
the background signal.

(Cohen-Saidon et al., 2009; Sigal et al., 2006). For example, in the
ERK system, the nuclear level of ERK2 (which corresponds to X
in the present notation) varies by up to 4-fold across individual
cells (Cohen-Saidon et al., 2009). When an external signal arrives
(the growth factor EGF), the nuclear level of ERK2 in each cell
transiently rises by approximately the same fold-change over
the basal level (Figure 5A; Cohen-Saidon et al., 2009). Thus,
more ERK2 enters the nucleus in cells with a high basal ERK2
level than in cells with a low level. An absolute detection mechanism would generate different downstream responses in
different cells due to the different absolute level of nuclear
ERK2 (Figure 5A). In contrast, a fold-change detection mechanism, such as that provided by the I1-FFL, can allow all cells to
have an identical response to the external signal, despite cellcell variation in the basal level of the activator X (Figure 5A).
A second potentially useful property of fold-change detection
is the ability to maintain sensitivity despite noise in the X activity
(Figure 5B). Such noise can result from rapid fluctuations in
the external signal level (e.g., external fluctuations in EGF
concentration as it varies in space and time). Noise strength,
defined as the standard deviation of a signal around its mean,
is known to increase with signal strength. In many systems,pthe
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
standard deviation of a signal increases proportionally to X .
Thus, a background signal of 1 might have noise of ± 0.1,
whereas a background signal of 10 might have a higher noise
of ± 0.3. This increasing noise leads to a fundamental problem
with absolute detection mechanisms. If we had an absolute
detection mechanism and would like it to detect changes of
0.3 above a background signal of 1, we would run into trouble
when the background signal rises to 10 because noise in the
signal would trigger false-positive responses (Figure 5B). A
fold-change detection mechanism can address this problem: it
allows detection of a signal that changes by 0.3 above a background of 1 but obtains a similar response only to changes of
3 above a background of 10.
Fold-change detection, therefore, assigns meaning to a signal
in reference to the background signal level, allowing responses
only to a signal that rises sufficiently above the noise. In other

words, signal discrimination is proportional to the background
level. This is analogous to Weber’s Law in sensory systems,
which states that the minimal detectable change in stimulus is
linear in the background stimulus (Figure 5C) (Ross and Murray,
1996) or, more generally, that the response amplitude to a change
in signal is inversely proportional to the background signal level. It
would be fascinating to test whether naturally occurring incoherent FFLs, found in numerous systems, act as fold-change
detection elements that provide gene regulation with the ability
to reliably detect signals above a variable and noisy background.
SUPPLEMENTAL DATA
Supplemental Data include five figures and can be found with this article online
at http://www.cell.com/molecular-cell/supplemental/S1097-2765(09)00859-4.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
For suggestions and critical reading of the manuscript, the authors thank
Cellina Cohen-Saidon, Michael Springer, Eduardo Sontag, Jessica Gray,
and Adam Palmer. O.S. is grateful to the Azrieli Foundation for the award of
an Azrieli Fellowship. L.G. is a Robert Black Fellow of the Damon Runyon
Foundation (DRG-1958-07). This work was supported by the Kahn Family
Foundation (U.A.), R01 HD037277 (M.W.K.), the Novartis-Harvard-Hebrew
University program (M.W.K.), and the Israel Science Foundation (U.A.).
Received: August 20, 2009
Revised: November 13, 2009
Accepted: November 18, 2009
Published: December 10, 2009
REFERENCES
Alon, U. (2007). An Introduction to Systems Biology (Boca Raton, FL: Chapman
& Hall/CRC).
Barkai, N., and Leibler, S. (1997). Robustness in simple biochemical networks.
Nature 387, 913–917.
Basu, S., Mehreja, R., Thiberge, S., Chen, M.T., and Weiss, R. (2004).
Spatiotemporal control of gene expression with pulse-generating networks.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 6355–6360.

898 Molecular Cell 36, 894–899, December 11, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

Molecular Cell
Fold-Change Detection in Gene Regulation

Bintu, L., Buchler, N.E., Garcia, H.G., Gerland, U., Hwa, T., Kondev, J., and
Phillips, R. (2005). Transcriptional regulation by the numbers: models. Curr.
Opin. Genet. Dev. 15, 116–124.

Levchenko, A., and Iglesias, P.A. (2002). Models of eukaryotic gradient
sensing: application to chemotaxis of amoebae and neutrophils. Biophys. J.
82, 50–63.

Boyer, L.A., Lee, T.I., Cole, M.F., Johnstone, S.E., Levine, S.S., Zucker, J.P.,
Guenther, M.G., Kumar, R.M., Murray, H.L., Jenner, R.G., et al. (2005). Core
transcriptional regulatory circuitry in human embryonic stem cells. Cell 122,
947–956.

Li, X., Cassidy, J.J., Reinke, C.A., Fischboeck, S., and Carthew, R.W. (2009).
A microRNA imparts robustness against environmental fluctuation during
development. Cell 137, 273–282.

Cohen-Saidon, C., Cohen, A.A., Sigal, A., Liron, Y., and Alon, U. (2009).
Dynamics and variability in ERK2 response to EGF in individual living cells.
Mol. Cell 36, this issue, 885–893.
Eichenberger, P., Fujita, M., Jensen, S.T., Conlon, E.M., Rudner, D.Z., Wang,
S.T., Ferguson, C., Haga, K., Sato, T., Liu, J.S., and Losick, R. (2004). The
program of gene transcription for a single differentiating cell type during
sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. PLoS Biol. 2, e328.
Entus, R., Aufderheide, B., and Sauro, H.M. (2007). Design and
implementation of three incoherent feed-forward motif based biological
concentration sensors. Syst. Synth. Biol. 1, 119–128.
Friedland, A.E., Lu, T.K., Wang, X., Shi, D., Church, G., and Collins, J.J. (2009).
Synthetic gene networks that count. Science 324, 1199–1202.
Gardner, T.S., Cantor, C.R., and Collins, J.J. (2000). Construction of a genetic
toggle switch in Escherichia coli. Nature 403, 339–342.
Goentoro, L., and Kirschner, M.W. (2009). Evidence that fold-change, and not
absolute level, of b-catenin dictates Wnt signaling. Mol. Cell 36, this issue,
872–884.
Kaplan, S., Bren, A., Dekel, E., and Alon, U. (2008). The incoherent feedforward loop can generate non-monotonic input functions for genes. Mol.
Syst. Biol. 4, 203.
Kim, D., Kwon, Y.K., and Cho, K.H. (2008). The biphasic behavior of incoherent
feed-forward loops in biomolecular regulatory networks. Bioessays 30,
1204–1211.
Krejci, A., Bernard, F., Housden, B.E., Collins, S., and Bray, S.J. (2009). Direct
response to Notch activation: signaling crosstalk and incoherent logic. Sci.
Signal 2, ra1.

Ma, W., Trusina, A., El-Samad, H., Lim, W.A., and Tang, C. (2009). Defining
network topologies that can achieve biochemical adaptation. Cell 138,
760–773.
Mangan, S., and Alon, U. (2003). Structure and function of the feed-forward
loop network motif. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 11980–11985.
Mangan, S., Itzkovitz, S., Zaslaver, A., and Alon, U. (2006). The incoherent
feed-forward loop accelerates the response-time of the gal system of
Escherichia coli. J. Mol. Biol. 356, 1073–1081.
Milo, R., Shen-Orr, S., Itzkovitz, S., Kashtan, N., Chklovskii, D., and Alon, U.
(2002). Network motifs: simple building blocks of complex networks. Science
298, 824–827.
O’Donnell, K.A., Wentzel, E.A., Zeller, K.I., Dang, C.V., and Mendell, J.T.
(2005). c-Myc-regulated microRNAs modulate E2F1 expression. Nature 435,
839–843.
Ross, H.E., and Murray, D.J. (1996). E.H. Weber on the Tactile Senses (East
Sussex, UK: Erlbaum Taylor & Francis).
Shen-Orr, S.S., Milo, R., Mangan, S., and Alon, U. (2002). Network motifs in the
transcriptional regulation network of Escherichia coli. Nat. Genet. 1, 64–68.
Sigal, A., Milo, R., Cohen, A., Geva-Zatorsky, N., Klein, Y., Alaluf, I., Swerdlin,
N., Perzov, N., Danon, T., Liron, Y., et al. (2006). Dynamic proteomics in
individual human cells uncovers widespread cell-cycle dependence of nuclear
proteins. Nat. Methods 3, 525–531.
Swiers, G., Patient, R., and Loose, M. (2006). Genetic regulatory networks
programming hematopoietic stem cells and erythroid lineage specification.
Dev. Biol. 294, 525–540.

Lahav, G., Rosenfeld, N., Sigal, A., Geva-Zatorsky, N., Levine, A.J., Elowitz,
M.B., and Alon, U. (2004). Dynamics of the p53-Mdm2 feedback loop in
individual cells. Nat. Genet. 36, 147–150.

Tyson, J.J., Chen, K.C., and Novak, B. (2003). Sniffers, buzzers, toggles and
blinkers: dynamics of regulatory and signaling pathways in the cell. Curr.
Opin. Cell Biol. 15, 221–231.

Laming, D. (1986). Sensory Analysis (London: Academic Press).

Weber, E.H. (1905). Tatsinn and Gemeingefuhl (Leipzig, Germany: Verlag von
Wilhelm Englemann).

Lee, T.I., Rinaldi, N.J., Robert, F., Odom, D.T., Bar-Joseph, Z., Gerber, G.K.,
Hannett, N.M., Harbison, C.T., Thompson, C.M., Simon, I., et al. (2002).
Transcriptional regulatory networks in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Science
298, 799–804.

Yi, T.M., Huang, Y., Simon, M.I., and Doyle, J. (2000). Robust perfect adaptation in bacterial chemotaxis through integral feedback control. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 97, 4649–4653.

Molecular Cell 36, 894–899, December 11, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 899

