REPORTS

The Onset of Collective Behavior
in Social Amoebae
Thomas Gregor,1* Koichi Fujimoto,2† Noritaka Masaki,2 Satoshi Sawai1,2‡
In the social amoebae Dictyostelium discoideum, periodic synthesis and release of extracellular
cyclic adenosine 3´,5´-monophosphate (cAMP) guide cell aggregation and commitment to form
fruiting bodies. It is unclear whether these oscillations are an intrinsic property of individual cells
or if they exist only as a population-level phenomenon. Here, we showed by live-cell imaging of
intact cell populations that pulses originate from a discrete location despite constant exchange of
cells to and from the region. In a perfusion chamber, both isolated single cells and cell populations
switched from quiescence to rhythmic activity depending on the concentration of extracellular
cAMP. A quantitative analysis showed that stochastic pulsing of individual cells below the threshold
concentration of extracellular cAMP plays a critical role in the onset of collective behavior.

P

collectively can cope with the new environment.
Studies on chemical oscillators (2), glycolytic oscillations in yeast (3), and a synthetic gene circuit
in bacteria (4) have demonstrated that synchronized oscillations may rely on a similar quorum
sensing–type transition. Unlike in cases where
synchronized oscillations appear by entrainment
of phase and frequencies of autonomously oscillating elements [e.g., fireflies (5), circadian

1
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo 153-8902, Japan. 2Exploratory Research for Advanced
Technology (ERATO) Complex Systems Biology Project, Japan
Science and Technology Agency ( JST), Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

*Present address: Department of Physics, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.
†Present address: Department of Biological Sciences, Osaka
University, Toyonaka 560-0043, Japan.
‡To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail:
cssawai@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Fig. 1. Live-cell imaging of cAMP signaling
during early development of D. discoideum
cells. (A) About 180 cells
were confined to a 420mm-diameter area on hydrophobic agar (22).
Snapshots were taken at
times indicated by the
red asterisks in (B). Dark
area in rightmost snapshot corresponds to final
aggregation site of the
population. (B) Time course
of changes in FRET efficiency, averaged over all
cells (time indicates hours
after starvation). The fluorescent intensities of the
cyan fluorescent protein
channel divided by that of
the yellow fluorescent protein channel are plotted
on the y axis. The upper
left inset is a colored schematic for the subregions
analyzed in (C). (C) Enlargements of the time
series for each subregion,
containing zero to five
cells. Red bars indicate
time windows in (B),
chronologically ordered
from left to right. Colors
correspond to the colors
of the spatial regions
displayed in the inset in (B). Small differences in the rising phase of the pulses for individual regions correspond to cAMP waves that are propagating in space
(see also fig. S7).
www.sciencemag.org

SCIENCE

VOL 328

21 MAY 2010

Downloaded from https://www.science.org at University Erlangen Nuernberg on September 30, 2026

opulations of microorganisms often undergo transitions to coordinated activities
depending on nutrient availability and
presence of other microbes in the environment.
In a process termed “quorum sensing” (1), small
signaling molecules are synthesized and secreted
into the extracellular space. When the concentration of the molecules reaches a threshold, the cell
population undergoes a transition to a state that

rhythms (6), somite segmentation (7), Josephson
junction arrays (8), chemical reactions (9), etc.
(10)], the quorum sensing–type transition is accompanied by a spontaneous change from quiescence to oscillations at the individual level.
The transition, referred to as “dynamical quorum
sensing,” encodes cell-density information in the
frequency of the oscillations (2, 3), because the
small-molecule threshold may be reached more
quickly at higher cell densities. Although the
scheme can provide a robust means for a single
cell to change its state qualitatively depending on
the cell density, exposing the basis of the oscillatory transition in cell populations has remained
a challenge (11, 12) because of difficulties in analyzing the dynamics of individual cells and the

1021

REPORTS
population simultaneously. Moreover, how microorganisms use cellular oscillatory mechanisms
to implement complex life-cycle strategies at the
population scale remains unexplored.

Chemoattractant signaling in the social amoebae Dictyostelium discoideum is one of the
best-known examples of cell-cell signaling that
mediates cooperation in microorganisms (13).

When stimulated with extracellular cyclic adenosine 3´,5´-monophosphate (cAMP), cells respond
by synthesizing and secreting more cAMP, which
results in nondissipating waves of cAMP (14, 15)

Fig. 3. The cAMP-induced cytosolic cAMP signaling response of isolated individual cells in a perfusion chamber. (A) Representative time courses of
subthreshold response (four cells are represented
by different colors). The concentration of extracellular cAMP was changed at time points indicated
by dashed lines (0 M, perfusion with buffer only,
no cAMP). (B) Damped and persistent oscillations of
cytosolic cAMP when perfused with 3 nM and 10 mM
exogenous cAMP, respectively (colors indicate
four individual cells). (C) Single-cell input/output
relation of time- and cell-averaged responses to
applied cAMP ranging from 100 pM to 100 mM
(blue and red lines correspond to 3- and 30-min
averages, respectively). The relative cAMP output
of an isolated cell for a given input stimulus
over a time period T is evaluated here by computing the time-integral of I485/I540 given by
Icyt:cAMP (T) ¼ 1T ∫T0 I485 (t)/I540 (t)dt, where the stimulus is applied at t = 0 (22) (fig. S9). (D and E)
Individual cells responding to repetitive stimuli at 6-min (D) and 3-min (E) intervals (see fig. S8
for 4-min and 15-min intervals). Shaded regions, stimulus on (10 nM cAMP perfusion for 1 min);
white regions, stimulus off (buffer perfusion only, no cAMP). Cells were set well below the
transition point shown in Fig. 2C (separation >1mm; flow rate >4 ml/min).

1022

21 MAY 2010

VOL 328

SCIENCE

www.sciencemag.org

Downloaded from https://www.science.org at University Erlangen Nuernberg on September 30, 2026

Fig. 2. Synchronized population-level oscillations of cytosolic
cAMP. Cells were placed in a perfusion chamber (volume of
~0.25 ml) 4 to 6 hours after starvation. (A) Populationaveraged behavior at cell densities of 1/8 monolayer (ML; 1 ML
unit is 6600 cells/mm2), 1/32 ML, and 1/64 ML (top to bottom,
respectively) under buffer at a fixed flow rate of 1 ml/min. The
lowest panel is at 1/32 ML and 16 ml/min. (B) A phase diagram
summarizes 148 experiments at various densities and flow
rates. The mean firing rate (min−1) is represented in color. Red
regions display the highest firing rates (period of ~6 min).
Sporadic firing occurs in the blue regions (see also fig. S5).
White regions correspond to regimes of no spontaneous firing;
white vertical lines indicate nonlinear breaks in the x axis. (C)
Firing rate as a function of the ratio between cell density and
flow rate (r/k) (blue circles). Mean T SE (indicated in red) are
computed from equi-populated bins. Four points around a value
of −2 on the x axis were considered outliers because they were
sampled at very low k (flow rates < 1 ml/min), where the effect
of extracellular PDE is nonnegligible (30).

REPORTS
individual cells revealed a continuous exchange of
cells to and from the signaling centers. Together,
these observations suggest that the oscillations do
not originate from autonomous activities of
specialized cells, but rather that they probably
result from inhomogeneous fluctuations in the
concentration of extracellular signaling molecules
that favor pulse generation.
To probe the extracellular conditions necessary to initiate periodic pulses, we placed cells
in a perfusion chamber that provides rapid mixing and exchange of extracellular buffer to ensure
a uniform and controlled environment. Pulsing
rates were systematically measured for a wide
range of cell densities and dilution rates. Representative data are shown in Fig. 2A. At sufficiently high densities (~103 cells/mm2) and under
moderate flow speed (~1 ml/min), cells periodically fire approximately once every 6 min on
average (Fig. 2A, top panel), which is typically
observed in an intact population near a monolayer
density (14, 16, 17) (Fig. 1B). With decreasing cell
density, the synchronized pulses become sporadic
and finally cease (Fig. 2A). The dependence of the
firing rate on cell density and dilution rate is
presented as a phase diagram (Fig. 2B). The
frequency of pulsing at flow rates >1 ml/min is
proportional to a single parameter, r/k, which
defines the ratio of cell density r to flow rate k
(Fig. 2C). The pulsing rate is close to zero when
r/k is small. As r/k is increased, the frequency
increases logarithmically and levels off at ~6-min
oscillations.
To understand the origin of this dynamical
transition, we quantified the response of single
isolated cells to continuous application of exogenous cAMP (Fig. 3, A and B). In the absence
of extracellular cAMP, cytosolic cAMP concen-

Fig. 4. Dynamical quorum
sensing–type transition in
a population of excitable/
oscillatory switch elements.
(A) Representative simulated time courses of average cAMP concentrations
(cytosolic [cAMP]cyt and extracellular [cAMP]ext in linear
and logarithmic scales, respectively). Thin colored lines
indicate [cAMP]cyt in individual cells. Cell densities
were increased in incremental steps of 1/768 ML, 1/192
ML, 1/48 ML, 1/12 ML, and
1/3 ML at k = 5 ml/min. (B)
Firing rate as a function of
r/k as predicted by the
coupled phase model with
(blue line; eq. S5) or without
(gray squares; eq. S5) incorporation of stochastic pulsing. For comparison, see experimental data from Fig.
2C (red circles) and mean-field approximation (dashed black line; eq. S6). (C)
Model prediction of desynchronization at elevated cytosolic cAMP concentrations [a 10-fold increase in maximum (Amax) and basal (Abas) cytosolic cAMP
concentrations; eq. S1]. [cAMP]cyt normalized by Amax in individual cells (thin
www.sciencemag.org

trations remain steady with some fluctuations
(fig. S4). At subnanomolar stimulation, cells pulse
randomly (Fig. 3A). Upon application of nanomolar concentrations of cAMP, cells display
excitatory behavior (1 nM in Fig. 3A and 3 nM
in Fig. 3B)—a sharp transient rise that peaks after
~30 s is followed by smaller peaks that gradually
attenuate. Damping of the response becomes less
marked at micromolar concentrations of cAMP
(Fig. 3B; 10 mM). The oscillatory responses persist at 2.5- to 8-min periods, which vary from cell
to cell. The peaks appear even at 100 mM cAMP
(fig. S9), well above the saturation dose of the
cAMP receptors (23), suggesting that cytosolic
oscillations can occur without periodic changes
in the concentration of extracellular cAMP. However, this persistent oscillatory behavior depends
strictly on the presence of extracellular cAMP,
because when the stimulus is removed, cytosolic
cAMP returns to its prestimulus level within 30
to 60 s (Fig. 3A at 90 min; Fig. 3B at 65 min).
From fluorometric measurements, we estimate
that the basal and the peak concentrations of cytosolic cAMP correspond on average to ~400 nM
and ~10 mM, respectively (fig. S3). Figure 3C
summarizes the cytosolic cAMP responses in
the form of an input/output relation (see also fig.
S9). The input corresponds to the applied cAMP
concentrations and the output to the integrated
response over two time intervals: (i) 3 min, corresponding to the initial peak of the response
(Fig. 3C; blue curve); and (ii) 30 min (red curve).
The 3-min interval exhibits a half-maximal
output at 0.5 T 0.1 nM cAMP, suggesting that a
cell can be excited by a very low number of
cAMP molecules. For the longer interval, the halfmaximal concentration is 1.7 T 0.2 nM owing to
damping of the response.

Downloaded from https://www.science.org at University Erlangen Nuernberg on September 30, 2026

that guides aggregation of individual amoeboid
cells. Most of our understanding of the cAMP
oscillations in Dictyostelium is based on populationlevel optical-density observations (15–17) or
isotope dilution assays of cAMP on fixed samples
(14, 18–20). Because such measurements hide
possible cell-cell heterogeneities, it is unknown
whether the initiation of the periodic behavior is
due to synchronization of cells that can autonomously oscillate regardless of interactions with
other cells, or whether it is a “dynamical quorum
sensing”–type phenomenon (3)—i.e., individual
cells remain nonoscillatory unless the entire
population becomes oscillatory.
To elucidate the onset of the cAMP oscillations, we used a fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)–based sensor (21) to directly
monitor cytosolic cAMP in live Dictyostelium
cells (22) (fig. S3). Inhibiting synthesis of cAMP
inhibited oscillations, confirming that changes in
FRET efficiency reflect changes in cytosolic
cAMP concentrations (22) (fig. S1). A representative time course of development is shown in Fig.
1, A and B (movie S1). Cells began to fire
synchronously 5 hours after nutrient deprivation
with pulses occurring sporadically every 15 to 30
min (Fig. 1B; 5 to 7 hours). Over the next 2
hours, the period of firing shortened to 8 min and
thereafter to 6 min when cells began to aggregate.
The entire population participated in the firing
from the first pulse (Fig. 1C, leftmost panel). Differences in the phase of the oscillations depending
on the regions indicate that pulses propagated in
space as waves (fig. S7). Different spatial locations
competed for wave initiation (Fig. 1C, second
panel from the left). However, a single region
eventually dominated and determined the aggregation center (Fig. 1A, middle panel). Tracking of

gray lines; four cells are highlighted by colors). Blue line indicates population
average. (D) Poorly synchronized population-level oscillations in regA− mutants
whose degradation of intracellular cAMP is reduced (1/4 ML; 2 ml/min). Colors
indicate average signals by cells in four 100 mm by 100 mm regions separated
by ~150 mm. Blue line indicates average of the four regions.

SCIENCE

VOL 328

21 MAY 2010

1023

REPORTS

1024

lularly before individual cells fully recover their
state of excitability.
To determine quantitatively the origin of
synchronized pulses in the population, we incorporated the observed response behavior into Eq.
1. To this end, the single-cell–level dynamics of
cytosolic cAMP is described by a phase equation
(eqs. S1 and S2 and fig. S6A) that reproduces the
pulsatile cAMP output observed in Fig. 3 (fig.
S6B). When such cellular elements are coupled
(eq. S5), the population switches from a quiescent
to an oscillatory state at a critical cell density (Fig.
4A). The model can accurately reproduce the
frequencies of the synchronized oscillations (Fig.
4B; blue line and red circles) only when the
random pulsing observed at subnanomolar concentrations (Fig. 3A and fig. S4) is taken into
account. Without random pulsing, the curve
appears slanted and shifts toward higher r/k
(Fig. 4B; gray line). Hence, our model confirms
the importance of sporadic random firing at the
onset of synchronized pulses in the population,
as observed experimentally in fig. S5. At subnanomolar concentrations of extracellular cAMP,
the probability that a cell is randomly excited
increases (Fig. 3A and fig. S4), enhancing the
chance for other cells to fire (fig. S6C). A chain
reaction of excitation is thus generated that can
give rise to synchronized pulses [Fig. 4A (1/48
ML) and fig. S6C] even at subnanomolar
concentrations below the threshold. Thus, the
question of whether specialized cells initiate
synchronized pulses is ill posed; the initiation
process is inherently collective and stochastic.
Synthesis of intracellular cAMP requires a
receptor-mediated activation of adenylyl cyclase
ACA (fig. S1, D to G)—the main enzyme responsible for converting adenosine 5′-triphosphate
(ATP) to cAMP during this stage of Dictyostelium
development. Binding of cAMP to the membranebound receptor induces production of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3) that recruits
an activating factor containing a specific PIP3binding domain [pleckstrin homology (PH) domain] to the plasma membrane (25). Given the
small number of extracellular cAMP molecules
necessary to elicit a response in cytosolic cAMP
(Fig. 3C), the stochastic nature of the pulsing
may originate from random binding of cAMP to
the membrane-bound cAMP receptor. However,
the threshold value in the response (0.5 T 0.1 nM
in Fig. 3C; blue curve) is an order of magnitude
below the affinity of the receptor (23). Because a
similar dosage dependence of membrane translocation of a PH domain–containing protein has
been observed (26), our input/output relation (Fig.
3C, blue curve) most likely reflects the kinetics
downstream of the membrane receptors but
upstream of PIP3.
That cells can be oscillatory even at the
single-cell level in the perfusion setup (Fig. 3,
B, D, and E) might indicate that the emergence
of synchronized oscillations in the population is
not a collective phenomenon. However, these
cell-intrinsic oscillations appear only when the

21 MAY 2010

VOL 328

SCIENCE

concentrations of extracellular cAMP are kept
above 1 nM (Fig. 3B and fig. S9). Before extracellular cAMP can rise to this level spontaneously in a cell population, synchronized pulses
must emerge. In our perfusion experiments, at
low r/k the population remains in a state in which
pulses are emitted sporadically. In contrast, when
extracellular cAMP is increased to a sufficiently
high level, cells become transiently oscillatory.
This occurs at high r/k where the pulsing frequency reaches a plateau (Fig. 2C). At that level,
pulse timing is no longer dictated by the occurrence of random pulses in the population, but
rather by an oscillatory mechanism at the singlecell level that gates and paces the timing. As a
result, the pulses appear regularly at ~6-min intervals (Fig. 2A). One would expect that disruption of intracellular PDE (RegA) (27) should
have a strong deleterious effect if these cellintrinsic oscillatory dynamics involve a feedback
regulation via cytosolic cAMP (20). However, if
the main effect of disrupting RegA is to increase
the overall concentration of cAMP secreted into
extracellular space, regA− cell populations should
still be able to oscillate albeit with only partial
synchrony (Fig. 4C) because the extracellular
cAMP concentration should almost saturate the
dynamic range of the input/output relation (Fig.
3C and fig. S6B). In agreement with this model
prediction, we observe that regA− cells oscillate
but are poorly synchronized (Fig. 4D). Furthermore, because intrinsic oscillations observed at
saturating dose of extracellular cAMP are also
present in isolated regA− cells (fig. S10B), the
oscillations at the single-cell level do not require
a RegA-mediated feedback loop.
Finally, the entire sequence of events in an
intact cell population (Fig. 1), from the onset of
sporadic firing to determination of the final periodic signaling center, can be inferred from the
perfusion experiments. The key enzymes that
determine the rates of secretion (r) and of cAMP
decay (k) in Eq. 1 are ACA and extracellular
PDE, respectively (figs. S1, S2, and S10A), both
of which are expressed at very low levels but are
induced during the first 4 hours after starvation
(13, 28). When cAMP slowly begins to accumulate in the extracellular space, initial pulses are
randomly elicited owing to the stochastic subthreshold dynamics at the single-cell level. Although several centers compete for dominance,
the results in Figs. 2C and 4B predict that sites
that accumulate more extracellular cAMP than
others pulse at a higher frequency. Such sites will
entrain other sites that fire less often (10) and
therefore survive. Thus, the first site that accumulates enough extracellular cAMP to support the
saturating frequency (~6-min period) becomes the
persistent oscillatory center. This not only allows
aggregation of more cells to the same location,
but may also facilitate later development because
cAMP is required for cell differentiation (29).
The signaling centers in D. discoideum are
dynamic entities that self-organize in the population. The onset of synchronized pulses occurs

www.sciencemag.org

Downloaded from https://www.science.org at University Erlangen Nuernberg on September 30, 2026

The results in Figs. 2 and 3 indicate that accumulation of extracellular cAMP ([cAMP]ext)
in the population is essential for excitatory and
oscillatory cell responses. At low r/k, if cells
secrete cAMP on average at a constant rate r, then
[cAMP]ext changes according to
d½cAMPext
k
½cAMP (1)
¼ ρr −
dt
VT
which states that variations in cell density r
alter the effective synthesis rate of extracellular
cAMP, while the rate of dilution k divided by the
chamber volume VT determines how fast extracellular cAMP is removed. Assuming that the
system is at steady state in this regime, [cAMP]ext
must be proportional to the parameter r/k (eq.
S4), and hence Eq. 1 assumes a constant cell secretion rate for cAMP. Isolated cells exposed to
extracellular cAMP below the threshold concentration of ~500 pM (Fig. 3C), however, display
nonnegligible excitable dynamics that appear to
be stochastic (Fig. 3A and fig. S4). This observation matches well with the sporadic pulses observed experimentally at the population level (fig.
S5), when r/k is near the transition point (i.e., r/k ~
10−3 in Fig. 2C). Incorporating first-order secretion
(24) into Eq. 1, we computed the effective synthesis rate per monolayer cell density to be r =
5.2 nM/min (by eqs. S3 and S8), implying that
near the transition point, cells should only be able
to accumulate extracellular cAMP of less than
~10 pM (eq. S7). Such low concentrations, however, are more than an order of magnitude below
the responsive range of a single cell (Fig. 3C),
indicating a limitation of the static picture provided by Eq. 1.
At high r/k, the firing rate reaches a plateau
(~1/6 min−1 in Fig. 2C), which cannot be deduced from the observed cell responses to persistent stimuli (Fig. 3C) alone. When isolated cells
are repetitively stimulated with 10 nM cAMP at
6-min intervals, cells responded in pace with the
stimuli (Fig. 3D). However, at shorter intervals
the response gradually diminished (Fig. 3E and
fig. S8A), and at longer intervals random bursts
appeared spontaneously (fig. S8B). Thus, an individual Dictyostelium cell behaves as a resonance filter that selects a stimulus at 6-min
intervals. That is, extracellular cAMP must be
removed for a certain time period for cells to
respond to further stimuli. Such a time scale is a
single-cell–level property. The requirement of
cAMP removal is consistent with population
experiments that we performed in the absence of
flow (<1 ml/min; Fig. 2B). They demonstrate
that synchronized oscillations require removal of
extracellular cAMP by extracellular phosphodiesterase (PDE, the enzyme that degrades extracellular cAMP) (figs. S2 and S10A). Together
with the observed cytosolic oscillations in cells
under prolonged stimulation (Fig. 3B), these
observations indicate that in addition to the time
it takes for the extracellular cAMP to return to
its original prepulse concentration (a global process mediated by extracellular PDE), there exist
local mechanisms that monitor time intracel-

REPORTS
by a switchlike response of individual cells to an
external threshold concentration. The initiation
is highly dynamic and collective, because the
threshold and the frequency of the response
cannot be attributed solely to those at the singlecell level. As random cells continue to emit pulses
sporadically, extracellular cAMP accumulates so
that, at the peak of the synchronized pulses, cells
become transiently oscillatory. The combination
of these two strategies, one global and the other
local, may allow cells to first determine the global
maximum of extracellular cAMP concentration
and then aggregate as the pulses become selfsustainable and are periodically emitted from such
locations.
References and Notes

Structural Insights into the
Assembly and Function of the
SAGA Deubiquitinating Module
Nadine L. Samara,1* Ajit B. Datta,1,2* Christopher E. Berndsen,1,2 Xiangbin Zhang,1,2
Tingting Yao,3 Robert E. Cohen,3 Cynthia Wolberger1,2†
SAGA is a transcriptional coactivator complex that is conserved across eukaryotes and performs
multiple functions during transcriptional activation and elongation. One role is deubiquitination
of histone H2B, and this activity resides in a distinct subcomplex called the deubiquitinating
module (DUBm), which contains the ubiquitin-specific protease Ubp8, bound to Sgf11, Sus1,
and Sgf73. The deubiquitinating activity depends on the presence of all four DUBm proteins.
We report here the 1.90 angstrom resolution crystal structure of the DUBm bound to ubiquitin
aldehyde, as well as the 2.45 angstrom resolution structure of the uncomplexed DUBm. The structure
reveals an arrangement of protein domains that gives rise to a highly interconnected complex, which
is stabilized by eight structural zinc atoms that are critical for enzymatic activity. The structure
suggests a model for how interactions with the other DUBm proteins activate Ubp8 and allows us to
speculate about how the DUBm binds to monoubiquitinated histone H2B in nucleosomes.
he covalent modification of chromatin is
a core feature of eukaryotic transcription
(1). The SAGA complex regulates genes
transcribed by RNA polymerase II by carrying
out multiple functions that include histone acetylation and deubiquitination (2, 3). The 1.8megadalton SAGA complex, which contains 21
proteins conserved from yeast to humans (4),
plays a role in transcription activation and also
couples transcription elongation with export of
the nascent RNA through the nuclear pore complex (5). SAGA is recruited to promoter regions

T

by activator proteins, where it catalyzes the cleavage of monoubiquitin from lysine-123 (K123)
of histone H2B, as well as acetylation of histone
H3 (6). Both of these activities are thought to
be important for evicting nucleosomes from the
promoter region and for facilitating transcription elongation (7). The yeast SAGA complex
has been a model for studying SAGA function
in the transcription cycle. Histone acetylation
by SAGA is mediated by the Gcn5 histone
acetyltransferase subunit, whereas histone H2B
deubiquitination is mediated by a discrete

www.sciencemag.org

SCIENCE

VOL 328

26. L. Bosgraaf, I. Keizer-Gunnink, P. J. Van Haastert, J. Cell
Sci. 121, 3589 (2008).
27. P. A. Thomason et al., EMBO J. 17, 2838 (1998).
28. N. Iranfar, D. Fuller, W. F. Loomis, Eukaryot. Cell 2, 664
(2003).
29. L. Kim, A. Harwood, A. R. Kimmel, Dev. Cell 3, 523
(2002).
30. At very low k (flow rates < 1ml/min), the effect of
extracellular PDE is nonnegligible. Pulses are no longer
observed when dithiothreitol is applied to inhibit
extracellular PDE (fig. S2), demonstrating that periodic
firing under these conditions depends on degradation of
extracellular cAMP by extracellular PDE released by the
cells. At higher k, clearing of extracellular cAMP from the
medium is mainly determined by dilution.
31. We thank V. O. Nikolaev and M. J. Lohse for providing
vector containing Epac1-camps; M. Kitahara and E. Hada
for technical help, E. C. Cox, S. Ishihara, K. Kaneko,
H. Kori, and J. Teramae for discussions and suggestions;
and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
(JSPS) postdoctoral fellowship (T.G.), K. Kaneko, and the
ERATO-JST for support.

Supporting Online Material
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/science.1183415/DC1
Materials and Methods
Figs. S1 to S10
References
Movie S1
15 October 2009; accepted 19 March 2010
Published online 22 April 2010;
10.1126/science.1183415
Include this information when citing this paper.

subcomplex known as the deubiquitinating
module (DUBm) (3, 8). The yeast DUBm
comprises four proteins: the ubiquitin-specific
protease (Ubp8) ubiquitin hydrolase, Sgf11,
Sus1, and Sgf73 (9, 10). Sgf73 tethers DUBm to
the rest of the SAGA complex through a central
domain; the N-terminal domain forms an
integral part of the DUBm (9). Sgf73, along
with Sus1, also facilitates SAGA’s role in
nuclear export by binding to components of
the nuclear pore complex (11). Although Ubp8
contains a ubiquitin-specific hydrolase (Usp) domain (12), the protein is inactive unless it is in
complex with the other three DUBm proteins
(9, 13). The structural basis for Ubp8 activation
is not understood, nor is its dependence on the
other three DUBm proteins to form a stable
complex that can specifically target H2B for
deubiquitination.
Drosophila and human SAGA include a
DUBm that functions analogously to the yeast
DUBm and comprises homologs of the yeast
proteins (10, 14, 15). In addition, the human
DUBm, consisting of USP22, ATXN7L3, ENY2
and ATXN7 (homologs of Ubp8, Sgf11, Sus1, and

Downloaded from https://www.science.org at University Erlangen Nuernberg on September 30, 2026

1. C. M. Waters, B. L. Bassler, Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 21,
319 (2005).
2. A. F. Taylor, M. R. Tinsley, F. Wang, Z. Huang, K. Showalter,
Science 323, 614 (2009).
3. S. De Monte, F. d’Ovidio, S. Danø, P. G. Sørensen, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 18377 (2007).
4. T. Danino, O. Mondragón-Palomino, L. Tsimring, J. Hasty,
Nature 463, 326 (2010).
5. J. Buck, E. Buck, Science 159, 1319 (1968).
6. S. Yamaguchi et al., Science 302, 1408 (2003).
7. I. H. Riedel-Kruse, C. Müller, A. C. Oates, Science 317,
1911 (2007).
8. K. Wiesenfeld, P. Colet, S. H. Strogatz, Phys. Rev. Lett.
76, 404 (1996).

9. I. Z. Kiss, Y. M. Zhai, J. L. Hudson, Science 296, 1676
(2002).
10. A. T. Winfree, in The Geometry of Biological Time
(Biomathematics Series) (Springer-Verlag, New York,
1980).
11. D. McMillen, N. Kopell, J. Hasty, J. J. Collins, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 679 (2002).
12. J. Garcia-Ojalvo, M. B. Elowitz, S. H. Strogatz, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 10955 (2004).
13. A. Goldbeter, Biochemical Oscillations and Cellular
Rhythms. The Molecular Bases of Periodic and Chaotic
Behaviour (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge,
1996).
14. K. J. Tomchik, P. N. Devreotes, Science 212, 443
(1981).
15. J. D. Gross, M. J. Peacey, D. J. Trevan, J. Cell Sci. 22, 645
(1976).
16. F. Siegert, C. Weijer, J. Cell Sci. 93, 325 (1989).
17. S. Sawai, P. A. Thomason, E. C. Cox, Nature 433, 323
(2005).
18. G. Gerisch, U. Wick, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
65, 364 (1975).
19. P. N. Devreotes, P. L. Derstine, T. L. Steck, J. Cell Biol. 80,
291 (1979).
20. M. Maeda et al., Science 304, 875 (2004).
21. V. O. Nikolaev, M. Bünemann, L. Hein, A. Hannawacker,
M. J. Lohse, J. Biol. Chem. 279, 37215 (2004).
22. Materials and Methods are available as supporting
material on Science Online.
23. R. L. Johnson et al., J. Biol. Chem. 267, 4600
(1992).
24. M. C. Dinauer, S. A. MacKay, P. N. Devreotes, J. Cell Biol.
86, 537 (1980).
25. F. I. Comer, C. K. Lippincott, J. J. Masbad, C. A. Parent,
Curr. Biol. 15, 134 (2005).

1
Department of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry, The
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21205, USA. 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21205, USA. 3Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO
80523, USA.

*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail:
cwolberg@jhmi.edu

21 MAY 2010

1025

The Onset of Collective Behavior in Social Amoebae
Thomas Gregor, Koichi Fujimoto, Noritaka Masaki, and Satoshi Sawai

Science 328 (5981), . DOI: 10.1126/science.1183415

View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1183415
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions

Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science (ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue NW,
Washington, DC 20005. The title Science is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Copyright © 2010, American Association for the Advancement of Science

Downloaded from https://www.science.org at University Erlangen Nuernberg on September 30, 2026

All Together Now
In the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, periodic synthesis and release of cyclic AMP (cAMP) guides the
cellular aggregation required to form fruiting bodies. It has been unclear whether the initiation of this behavior is owing
to synchronization of autonomously oscillating cells or whether individual cells remain nonoscillatory unless the entire
population becomes oscillatory. Gregor et al. (p. 1021, published online 22 April; see the Perspective by Prindle
and Hasty) used live-cell imaging to show that cAMP pulses originate from a specific location in space and that
individual cells move in and out of these signaling centers. The observations suggest that oscillations do not originate
from autonomous activities of specialized cells. However, individual cells do display stochastic cAMP-pulsing below
a threshold external concentration of cAMP, and the generation of synchronized oscillations could only be modeled
accurately when this random pulsing was taken into account.

