RE
JOURNAL
OF BIOKICICAL
CHEMISTRY
0 1994 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

Vol. 269, No. 9,Issue of M m h 4, pp. 7036-7044, 1994
Printed in U.S.A.

Localization of Ligand-induced Phosphorylation Sites to Serine
of the Dictyostelium cAMP
Clusters in the C-terminal Domain
Receptor, cARl*
(Received for publication, June 17, 1993, and in revised form, September 30, 1993)

Dale HereldS, Roxanne Vaughanl,Ji Yun Kim, Jane Borleis, andPeter Devreotesn
From the Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205

When Dictyostelium cells are stimulated with cyclic
gic receptors, muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, mating factor
adenosine 3’,S‘-monophosphate (CAMP), the major
sur- receptors of yeast, and CAMP receptors of Dictyostelium (reface CAMP receptorexpressedinearlydevelopment,
viewed in Ref. 1).
cAR1, undergoes a rapid phosphorylation and parallel
Dictyostelium utilizes extracellular CAMP for cell-to-cell comdecrease in electrophoretic mobility which may serve
to
munication
during a starvation-induced developmental proG protein-coupled receptor. gram which transforms a population of unicellular amebas into
regulate the activity of this
Biochemical analyses indicate the electrophoretic mo- a multicellular fruiting body. When stimulated by CAMP, cells
bility shift is caused by phosphorylationof serine resi- respond by moving toward thesource of CAMP,by relaying the
18 CAMPsignal to other cells (termed signaling), and by altering
dues within the C-terminal cytoplasmic domain. The
serines of this domain are grouped in four clusters, destheir patternof gene expression (reviewed in Refs. 2,3). These
ignated 1 to 4 (in N- toC-terminalorder).
T w o apresponses are mediated by four homologous CAMP receptors
proaches were taken to determine the distribution of
each transiently expressedat a characteristic stage in
phosphorylationsites among the serine clusters. First, (CARS),
a
development
(4, 5L2 Targeted gene disruptions have shown
proteolytic analysis of the C-terminal domain was perthat
cAR1,
which
is maximally expressed during the aggregaformed. Second, mutants lacking various combinations
of the serine clusters were created
by site-directed mu- tion stage, accounts for most of the CAMP-binding sites and
mediates responses tocAMP at this stage(6).cAR2, cAR3, and
tagenesis and their abilities to undergo ligand-induced
at later times
cAR4 are believed to carry out similar functions
modification were determined. Both approaches yielded
(7,
8h2
in
development
corroborativeresultsconsistentwiththefollowing
In the signaling response, exogenous CAMP triggers a tranmodel: the stimulus induces the addition of approxi2; sient activation of adenylyl cyclase which results in the tranmately two phosphatesto cluster 1 and one to cluster
basal phosphorylationoccurs predominantly in cluster sient secretion of CAMP. Theattenuation of theresponse,
3 and toa lesser extent in cluster
2; and cluster4 is not termed adaptation, has been
extensively investigated (9).Once
phosphorylated.Thephosphorylation-deficientrecepcells are adapted to a subsaturating concentration of ligand,
tor mutants should be useful for establishing the role
of remain responsive to further increments. The magnitude
they
ligand-induced phosphorylation ofcARl in chemotaxis, of the elicited response is proportional to thechange in receptor
cell-cell signaling, and gene expression.
occupancy. When a stimulus is removed, cells regain sensitivity
(or deadapt) with a half-time of a few minutes (10).
A similar uncoupling process is observed for a variety of G
The cell surface receptors for a wide variety of hormones, protein-coupled receptors. Studies of p-adrenergic receptors
neurotransmitters, and related extracellular ligands are char- and rhodopsin suggest that ligand-inducedphosphorylation
acterized by a common structure consisting of seven mem- plays a fundamental role in this process (reviewed in Ref. 1)
brane-spanning segments. In general, these receptors transand, analogously, theligand-dependent phosphorylation of
intermediary
G cARl is correlated, in terms of kinetics and dose-dependence,
duce signals to effectors by activating
pr0teins.l Well-studied examples include rhodopsin,p-adrener- with adaptation. Dephosphorylation and deadaptationare also
coincident (11).These correlations suggest that adaptation of
* This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant adenylyl cyclase activation and perhaps other cARl-mediated
GM34933 (to P.N. D.).The costs of publication of this article were events require phosphorylation of cAR1.
defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must
Previous studies have shown that cARl is basally phosphotherefore be herebymarked “advertisement” in accordancewith 18
rylated and, upon exposure of cells to CAMP, approximately 4
U.S.C. Section 1734 solely t o indicate this fact.
additional mol of phosphate are rapidly transferred to each
$Supported by a fellowshipfromTheDamonRunyon-Walter
Winchell Cancer Research Fund.
mole of receptor (12). Concomitantly, a marked electrophoretic
5 This author’s contribution this
to work was substantial including all mobility decrease occurs. We demonstrate here that the elecof the experimentswhich utilized developedAX3 cells.
Present address:
Neuroscience Branch, NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse,Addiction Re- trophoretic mobility shift is a consequence of phosphorylation
and that basal and ligand-stimulated phosphorylation occurs
search Center, Baltimore, MD 21224.
1 To whom correspondence should be addressed Dept. of Biological principally on serine residues within the C-terminalcytoplasChemistry, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 725 N. mic domain of cAR1. Based on the deduced sequence of CAR1
Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205. Tel.: 410-955-3225; Fax: 410-955(4), the 18 serines in the C-terminal
cytoplasmic domain canbe
5759.
1 The abbreviations used are: G protein, guanine nucleotide-binding
regulatory protein;CAMP, cyclic adenosine 3’,5’-monophosphate;CAR, PAGE, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; TAME, N-a-p-tosyl-L-argi3-[(cholamidopropyl)-dimethylammoniol-1- ninemethyl ester; TLCK,N-a-p-tosyl-L-lysinechloromethylketone;
cAMP receptor;CHAPS,
propanesulfonate;GTPyS,guanosine
5’-[y-thioltriphosphate; MES, TPCK, N-tosyl-L-phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone.
A. Kimmel, personal communication.
2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid; NCS,
N-chlorosuccinimide;

7036

This is an Open Access article under the CC BY license.

Phosphorylation
Sites

T

T

in a Dictyostelium CAMP Receptor

P

T

7037

265

1

2

"

-

3 m 4

50 aa
FIG.1. Schematic view of the C A R 1 polypeptide. The positions of serine residues (0)and putative membrane segments (shaded) as proposed
by Klein et al. (4) are indicated. Brackets numbered 1 4 identlfy the 4 serine clusters of the C-terminal cytoplasmic domain. Potential NCS cleavage
sites including naturally occurring tryptophan residues (0)
and a single tryptophan inserted into mutant 335W336 (m) are indicated. Also shown
are potential Lys-C cleavage sites (A) and the C terminus of truncated mutant JK365. Residues referred to in the text are numbered. The C
terminus-specific antiserum described in the text is directed against the small region identified by the solid bar.
AX3 cells, membranes were prepared immediately following labeling
and CAMP stimulation by hypotonic lysis as described by Klein et al.
(18) except that RB was replaced with ERB (20m~ Tris-HC1, pH 7.5;5
m~ EDTA 0.5 m~ dithiothreitol; 1 mg/mI each of benzamidine and
1,lO-phenanthroline; 10 pg/ml each of TPCK, TLCK, and TAME; 0.6
pg/ml each of chymostatin and pepstatin A; 0.5 pg/ml antipain; 0.1
pg/ml each of leupeptin and aprotinin; 250 pg/ml N-carbobenzoxy+
phenylalanine; 100 pg/ml phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride).The cARl in
these membranes was subjected to either SDS solubilization and immunoprecipitation or trypsinization (described below).
Isolation of cARl Using CHAPS-Wild-type and mutant forms of
MATERIALS AND METHODS
cARl wereenriched by extracting labeled transformed cells three times
Mutagenesis of CAR141 cDNA 6B (4), subcloned into the EcoRI with ice-cold 1%CHAPS in EFtB and 10 m i n , 12,000 x g centrifugations
site of bacteriophage M13mp18 DNA, was used as template in oligo- (19). cAR1, which is not solubilized by CHAPS, was then solubilized
nucleotide-directed mutagenesis reactions performed as previously
from the resulting pellet with sample buffer for SDS-PAGE. cARl
is the
described (13). Mutagenic oligonucleotides used are summarized in
predominant phosphoprotein in the resulting preparation (see below).
Table I.
Experiments not shown indicate that this procedure is comparable to
The serines of clusters 1, 2, and 4 were substituted with either
immunoprecipitation for isolation of 32P-labeledcAR1.
alanine or glycine as indicated in Table I. The overlapping oligonucleocARl Immunoprecipitations-Immunoprecipitations were performed
tides designed to mutate cluster 1 were utilized in twosuccessive
rounds of mutagenesis. The 8 serines and single intervening leucine of as previously described (11). Briefly, membrane-associated cARl was
cluster 3 were deleted. Multiple serine clusters were mutated in reac- first solubilized with sample buffer containing 0.5% SDS and diluted
tions including mixtures of appropriate oligonucleotidesand either the 5-fold with immunoprecipitation buffer to yield a final SDS concentrawild-type or cluster 1-mutated template. Each serine cluster mutant is tion of 0.1% beforethe addition of antiserum and protein A-Sepharose.
designated by "cm" followed by 1, 2, 3, and/or 4 indicating which of its Samples of the soluble C-terminal domain producedby trypsinization of
serine clusters are mutated. For example, cm1234 is mutatedin all four membranes (see below) wereimmunoprecipitated similarly except they
serine clusters. The unmutated, or wild-type, receptor is designated as were diluted only 3-fold with immunoprecipitation buffer without introducing SDS. Unless specified otherwise, antiserum raised against
wt.
Site-directed mutagenesis was also used to insert a tryptophan resi- intact cARl (12) was used.
Production of C nrminus-specific Antiserum-A hgtll p-galactosiddue aRer H3= in 3357111336. The C terminally truncated mutant JK365
was produced by exonuclease I11 digestion of the cARl cDNA. At its C ase fusion protein encoding the 18 C-terminal amino acids of cARl was
terminus is L366 of cARl followed by the vector-encoded pentapeptide gel purified and used to generate rabbit antiserum (4). The ability of a
synthetic peptide identical to the 18 C-terminal amino acids to deplete
-wNSIS.
Dunsformution of Dictyostelium-Wild-type and mutated cDNAs receptor antibodies present in the antiserumdemonstrated its specificwere ligated into the EcoRI site of Bluescript plasmid (Stratagene) ity for the C terminus of cARl (not shown).
cARl was immunoPhosphatase neatment of ~ARl-~~P,-Labeled
which had been modified by the insertion of a BglII linker into the
EcoRV site. They were then moved as a BamHI-BglII fragment to the precipitated, and the resulting immune complexes (including protein
BglII site of either of the following G418-selectableexpression vectors: A-Sepharose) werewashed with phosphatase buffer (20n m HEPES, pH
pB18, an integrating vector (described in Ref. 14), or pJK1, an extra- 8.0, 25 n m KC1, 15 m~ MgCl,, 0.05% Triton X-100, and 0.1% SDS)and
chromosomal vector(described in Ref. 15). Expression constructs were then resuspended in 100 pl of phosphatase buffer. Calf intestinal alkaintroduced into Dictyostelium discoideumstrain AX3 byelectroporation line phosphatase (5 units, Boehringer Mannheim) was added where
essentially as described by Dynes and Firtel (16). Stably transformed indicated, and samples were incubated at 37 "C for 1 h. After washing
clones, resistant t o G418 (20pg/ml), were screened for cARlexpression once with phosphatase buffer, the treated immunoprecipatates were
solubilized with sample buffer for electrophoresis.
in the vegetative state by immunoblotting.
Phosphoamino Acid An~lysis-~~P~-Labeled
cARl was immunopreCell Growth and Development-AX3 cells were grown in HL5 medium and developed as previously described (17). Development was cipitated and subjected to SDS-PAGE. Gel regions containing cARl
initiated by washing the cells twice in Mes DB (20 m~ MES, pH 6.5,2 were excised, hydrated in 50 m~ NH4HC03, and subjected to trypsin
n m MgSO,, 0.2 IMI CaCl2). Cellsat 2 x 107/mlof MES DB were shaken proteolysis for 24 h. Material released from the gel fragments was
for 4 h with the application of pulses of50 n~ CAMP every 6 min. lyophilized, resuspended in 6 N HC1, and hydrolyzed for 2 h at 110 "C
Transformants were grown in HL-5 containing 20 pg/ml G418 and were under Nz. Hydrolysates were subjected to two dimensional electrophoresis on cellulose plates as previously described (20) followed by autoused without developing them.
"P Labeling and CAMP Stimulation of Cells-Developed AX3 cells or radiography. Unlabeled phosphoamino acid standards, added to the
vegetative transformants were washed and resuspended at lo8 celldml hydrolysates, were visualized with ninhydrin.
7kypsinization of Membranes-Membranes prepared from labeled
in MES DB.Caffeine, which blocksspontaneous CAMP oscillations(17),
and 1 mCi of carrier-free 32Pi(ICN) were added per ml of cell suspen- AX3 cells were resuspended in EFtB lacking TLCK, phenylmethylsulsion. Aftershaking for 30 min, half of the labeled cells werestimulated
fonyl fluoride, leupeptin, and aprotinin and were treated with trypsin
) added with CAMP (Worthington)at room temperature with occasional mixing.Unless othfor 5 min with 1p~ CAMP. Dithiothreitol(10 m ~was
to inhibit its degradation by extracellular phosphodiesterase. The sub- erwise indicated, digestions were performedwith 100 pg/mltrypsin for
scripts "-CAMP" and "+CAMP" modify the names of receptors (wild-type 30 min and terminated by the addition of soybean trypsin inhibitor
and mutant) isolated from unstimulated and stimulated cells, respec- (Worthington)to a final concentration of 150 pg/ml.Samples were centively.
trifuged at 10,000 revolutiondmin for 15 min and the supernatants
Preparation of Membranes-For experiments utilizing developed recovered. As described in the text, this treatment liberates a soluble

viewed as being organized in four clusters which we have designated, inN- to C-terminal order, as clusters 1through 4 (Fig.
1).By a combination of proteolytic analysis and site-directed
mutagenesis, we have determined the distribution of phosphorylation sites among these serine clusters. The non-phosphorylatable CAR1 mutants which are described here should be
useful in studies of the functional significance of CAR1 phosphorylation.

Phosphorylation Sites in a Dictyostelium CAMP Receptor

7038

TABLE
I
Oligonucleotides usedfor site-directed mutagenesis of CAR1
Sequence"

Mutation effectedb

Serine
Cluster
AtTectedc

CAATAACAATCCAGCACCATAT
CACCATATGGTGCAGGTCGTGGTAC
CGTGGTACTGCTGGTAAAACTA
GTGCAATGTGGTGCCGATATG
GAGCAATGTGCTTTGGAAAG

SeP9-Ala
SeFo2-Gly, SeFo3+Ala, SeFM+Gly
SeFo8+Ala
SeFz4+Gly, SeFZ6+Ala
SeF31+Ala
Deletes SeFmthrough SeF68
SeFa3-Ala,
Inserts 'IYp after His335

1
1
1
2
2
3
4
NA

AATGATGAAGGTAGATGAAGAAAAAC

SeP8S-Ala
AATATTCAAATT$CACTGCAACA?@.TGG
GGAAAGACATtggCCAAATATGG

Although antisense oligonucleotides were used, their sense sequences are shown in 5'-3' orientation. Underlined nucleotides represent
substitutions, lowercase identifies inserted nucleotides, and the symbol A marks the position of deleted nucleotides.
Atrected residues are numbered relative t o the N-terminal methionine of cAR1. Arrows denote substitutions.
e Serine clusters defined as in Fig. 1. NA, not applicable.
a

C-terminal receptor fragment.
RESULTS
m n i t y Purification of the C-terminal Dyptic F r a g m e n t 4 1 C
Relationship of Phosphorylation to Electrophoretic Mobility
terminus-specific antibodies were
covalently
coupled
to protein
AR1 is developmentally regulated,
A-Sepharose C U B (Pharmacia LKB Biotechnology Inc.) as described Shift-The expression of C
previously (21).Up to 10 volumes of supernatant from trypsinized mem- reaching maximal levels after 4-6 h of development (12). As
branes were applied to a column of the resin which wasthen extensively previously reported and shown in Fig. 2 A , stimulation of dewashed with 0.2 M triethanolamine, pH 8.2, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate
veloped AX3 cells with l p~ CAMP induced a rapid phosphofollowed by0.2 M triethanolamine, pH 8.2,0.5 M NaCl and finally eluted
rylation
and concomitant decrease in electrophoretic mobility
with 0.2 M triethanolamine, pH 12.Fractions containing the C-terminal
of cARl (lanes 1 and 2). Treatment of cARl extracted from
fragment were identified by SDS-PAGE, pooled,and dialyzed against 5
m~ EDTA, 20 m~ Tris, pH 8.0. The immunoaffinity matrix quantita- basal andCAMP-stimulated cells (referred toas CAR1--p and
tively removed the C-terminal fragment from the extract and yields cARl+-p)
with alkaline phosphatase resulted in the loss of
were typically 50-90%.
32Pifrom both forms (lanes 3 and 4 ) . Unlabeled CAR1 samples
Electrophoresis-Unlessspecified otherwise, SDS-PAGE was perreceived the same treatments and their
electrophoretic mobiliformed accordingto Laemmli (22). Some receptor digests were analyzed
ties wereanalyzed by immunoblotting (Fig. 2 B ) . Following
by"low molecular weight" SDS-PAGEon 18% gels as previously dewith
scribed (23). In contrast to standard gels, the separating gels of these in vitro dephosphorylation, c A R 1 + d P comigrated
have a pH of 9.3 and contain 10% glyceroland a acrylamidelbis-acryl- cAFt1"p
while dephosphorylation of cAR1-dp did not alter
amide ratio of 200:l.
its mobility.
Cleavage by N-Chlorosuccinimide (NCS)-Wild-type
and mutant
to phosWe next subjected CAR^--^ and cAFtl+-p
cARl were excised from gels and treated with NCS as previously described (24). The treated gel pieces were briefly washed, dried, and phoamino acid analysis in order to identify the amino acids
contained predomiinserted into the wells of a second gel. NCS
treatment of Lys-C digestion modified. As shown in Fig. 2C, C A R L cAR1,mp contained a trace
products was performed by lyophilizing and reconstituting them in 50% nantly phosphoserinewhile
acetic acid containing 5 mg/ml NCS. Following a 30-min incubation, amount of phosphothreonine in addition to phosphoserine. No
samples were concentrated and acetic acidremoved by evaporation phosphotyrosine was detected in either form. Nearly all of the
prior to SDS-PAGE.
5-fold increaseinphosphate
incorporationinduced by the
Endoproteinase Lys-CDigestion-The affinity-purified C-terminal
stimulus
occurred
on
serine
residues.
Taken together, these
fragment was digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Boehringer Mannobserved transition inelectrophoheim; 100-200 ng addeal00 pl sample) a t 37 "C forthe indicated times. results demonstrate that the
retic mobility of cARl is a direct result of stimulus-induced
Alternatively, wild-type and mutant forms of intact cARl from transformants were excised from gels.
The rehydrated gel pieces were mixed addition of phosphates to serine residues.
overnight with 2 volumes of 30 m~ Tris-HC1, pH8.0,7.5 m~ EDTA, and
Localization of the Major Site of Basal and Ligand-induced
0.075% SDS containing 1pdml Lys-C. The eluates, typically containing
Phosphorylation-According to the proposed topological model
70% of the total radioactivity, were lyophilized and reconstituted in
of cARl (4), there are 20 cytoplasmically disposed serine resisample buffer for electrophoresis.
Quantitation of Mutant Receptor Phosphorylation-In order to quan- dues; 2 are within the loop which joins the fifth and sixth
18 are in the
titate the amount of c A R l on immunoblots, a standard curve relating transmembrane segments, and the remaining
cAR1-bound lZ5Iand the amount of CAR1 protein was constructed as C-terminal cytoplasmic domain. Tao and Klein (25) proposed
sample were that a 23-kDa phosphopeptide, generated by chymotrypsin
follows. Increasing amounts of a single 32P-labeledwt+subjected to standard SDS-PAGE and electrophoreticallytransferred to treatment of cells, represents the C-terminal half
of cARl and
a polyvinylidene difluoridemembrane (Millipore). The membrane was
then probed with C terminus-specificantiserum followed by lZSI-protein contains these 20 serines. Using controlled proteolysis, we obA. Using an autoradiographic image as a guide, each region of the tained evidence that the sitesof phosphorylation are localized
membrane containing CAR1was excised, and theassociated 32Pand lZsI to the large C-terminal domain. Membranes containing 32Piwere quantitated by Cerenkov and gamma counting. Background ra- labeled cAR1+dp were digested with increasing amounts of
dioactivities were subtracted, and lZImeasurements were corrected for trypsin (Fig. 3A). At concentrations above 1&ml, the proteo32Pwhich could be detected by gamma counting. The amount of cARl lytic treatment released a soluble phosphorylated polypeptide
was taken as the measured 32Pcountdmin (i.e. the amount of the cARl
7 and 8).Over 90% of the cARl present in the
protein bound to the polyvinylidene difluoride membrane is propor- of 19 kDa (lanes
tional to the -1-associated 32P measured). The relationship between membranes could be digested, and 2535% of the released radioactivity appeared in the19-kDa fragment. Thispolypeptide
1251 and 32P (themeasure of cARl protein) was nearly linear.
cm2, and cm13, labeledwith 32Pin parallel with was effectively immunoprecipitated with a C terminus-specific
Samples of wtdP,
the
sample, weresubjected to this analysis. C A R 1 protein, antiserum (Fig. 3 A ) . When the tryptic fragments
released from
expressed in arbitrary units, was determined for these samples from
CAR^--^
and cAR1+dp were compared(Fig. 3B, lanes 1 and
their measured lz6I using the standard curve. The lZ5Imeasurements
used fell within the range of the standard curve. The C terminus- 3), the stimulus was observed to induce a slight increase in
specific antiserum used would be expected to recognizethese receptors apparent molecular weight and a 3-5-fold increase in phosequally well since the epitope does not includeserine clusters 1,2, or 3. phate incorporation similar to whatis observed for the intact
wt+-

Phosphorylation
Sites

Dictyostelium
in a

C

CAMP Receptor

7039

localize the
phosphorylated
residues,
wr
digested
cARl
samples with endoproteinase Lvs-C which clraves specifically
-CAMP
+CAMP
at lysine residues. A complete digcstion with this enzyme
is
expected to yield only threr serine-containing peptides from the
C-terminal cytoplasmic domain a 17-residue prptidr (Asn"'"W
S
Lys'"))containingserinecluster1,a62-residuepeptide
T
/
3 . and a
(Thr?"-Lys:"' ) which includes both clusters 2 and
1 2 3 4
cluster4-containing,20-residueprptidr
(Gln~"7:'-Asn:""I d r rived from the C terminus(sre Fig. 1 ). T h r :"P,-lahelrd tryptic
fragmentsfromCAR~.~A>,I>andcARl+c,,slr.wcrrcompletcly
digested with Lys-C (Fig. 3 3 ) . The CAR1 r,,sfl. samplr yielded
a n 11-kDa fragment (Ianc. 2,. and the cARl*,.,,Mr.samplr gave
FIG.2. I n vitro dephosphorylation of receptorsand phon- rise to a 1O-kI)a fragmrnt and a dyr-front frapnrnt clanr 4 1.
phoamino acid analysis. A 'T,-laheled cAR1.,,MI. (odd lanes1 and
Identical results were obtained when the tryptic fragments
of
cARl,,AMI.( F L W I n n v s ~from developed AX3 cells were treated with
alkaline phosphatase as descrihed under "Materials and Methods." Wt-,I\.MI' and wt+cAs,lp werv suhjectedto complete Lys-C digesSamples were incuhated without ( l a n e s I and 2 I or with phosphatase tion (lanes 6 and R j.
(lanes 3 and 4 ) and suhjected to SDS-PAGE followrd by autoradiomaIn order to identifv thrLys-C f r a p n e n t s . we carrfully examphy. R , unlabeled samples were treated identically and analyzed by
ined the time course of Lys-C digestion of the C-terminal dmimmunohlotting with cARl antiserum I l l 1. C . ~"2PP-laheled
samples of
41. 30 min of digcstion r/ane
cAR1.,AM,, a n d cARl,,,,,.
from A X 3 cells were analyzed for phos- main from cARl+cAxfIB (Fig. After
phoamino acid composition a s descrihed under 'Materials and Meth- 4 ) . the domain was cleaved to thrre lahelcd fragments.
a 16
ods." S. 7'. and Y mark t h e positions of phosphoserine, phosphothreo- kDa band containing ahout half
of t h r radioactivity. a minor 10
nine, and phosphotyrosine standards.
kDa band, and a fragment mipating at the dyr front containing the remainder of the radiolahrl. A small amount of apparreceptor. The solubility and large apparent molecular weight
of ently undigested C-terminal domain
also rrmainrd. With Inthese fragments suggest that proteolysis occurred in the cyto- creasing time of incubation. radiolahrl was padually lost frnm
plasmic domain at a site near the membrane, possibly
at any of t h e 16 kDa hand and quantitativrly nppearrd
in thr 10-kDa
293 (Fig. 1). Cleav- fragment (lanes .5-7). There was no furthrr increasr
in t h r
4 lysine residues between positions 287 and
age at a n y of these sites would be expected to yielda 15-kDa amount of radiolabel a t t h rdye front. Since multiple additions
of Lys-C over 6 h gave the same rrsult as a single addition
fragment.
to (lanes 7 and R ), the digestion was prrsumahly complete. (ImlsFor the studyof plasmid-encoded cARl mutants, we chose
express these and the wild-type receptor under the control
of a n sion of Lys-C demonstrated that proteolysis was not dur to
little endog- instability of the receptor preparation ( l a n e - 7 1 . T h e 16-kDa
actin promotor in growth stage cells which express
is re- intermediate was immunoprc~cipihtedhy t h r C terminus-sprenous cAR1. The plasmid-encodedwild-typereceptor
ferred to as wt. We previously reported that wt exhibits basal cific antiserum, whereas the dyr-front frapnrnt and thr 10and CAMP-stimulated phosphorylation and a n electrophoretic kDa peptide failed to he immunoprecipitated 1 not shown I.
mobility shift which are indistinguishable from those
of endogOur interpretation of these data is a s follows. First, cleavage
enous cARl (14). As shown in
Fig. 3 8 ( f a n e s 5 and 7). t h e at Lys""' occurs producing the small cluster I-containing prpradioactive
tryptic
fragments
derived
from
wt_,AMI> and tide which migrates at the dye front and the 16-kDa intermrW t + , A M p also could notbedistinguishedfromthosederived
diate which contains clusters 2, 3. and 4 and the C terminus.
from cAR1.
Subsequent cleavageof the 16-kDa prptidr atI , ~ s . ' " ~yirlds the
10-kDa fragment conhining clusters 2 and
Based on the trypsin proteolysis results, we predicted that
3 and the small
all of theincorporatedradioactivitywouldbepresenton
a cluster 4-containing peptide. The lattrris probably not lahrlrd
single NCS cleavage productof 127 residues since thereis only since the radioactivity is quantitativrly convertcd from thr 161 tryptophan in the C-terminal domain (Trp2'"', see Fig. 1). A s to t h r 10-kDa fragment, and there are no immunoprecipitablc
,..3LP-labeled products in the complrtr digest. Thus, thc. small
shown in Fig. 3C. the major phosphopeptide generated upon
NCS cleavage of W t + , A M I > has an apparent sizeof 27 kDa. The cARl+,A~r~-derivrd fragmrnt migrating at thr dye front. kntnsame treatment of Wt-,A.MI' yielded a less radioactive phospho- tively identified as containing clustcr 1. r r p r r s r n t s a major sit(.
of stimulus-induced phosphorylation. Prrsumahly. thr 11 and
3 C ) . These data
peptide with a slightly faster mobility (Fig.
suggest that the major NCS phosphopeptide is basally phosc,,xfIp and cAR1..As,I., rcsprctivrly.
10 kDa bands from cARl
a shift in
phorylated and, like the intact receptor, undergoes
2 and 3
represent the same polypeptidr which contrrins clustrrs
electrophoreticmobilityuponfurtherphosphorylationin
re- and much of the basal phosphorylation. In addition. this polysponse to CAMP.
peptide exhibits some cA.MP-drpendmt phosphorylation which
Although these NCS fragments migrate more slowly than
likelyaccounts for theohsrrvedclcctrophorct~cmohilityinexpected, several lines of evidence verify their C-terminal ori- crease.
gin. First, they could
he immunoprecipitated using C terminusLocalization of I'hnsphor$afion
Sites t o Specific Scrlncspecific antiserum (not shown). Second, C-terminal truncation Clusters-To independentlyconfirmandrxtendourundcrof the receptor (mutant JK.5'65; refer to Fig. 1) resultedin
standing of the distribution of phosphorylation. we c*xpressrd
3C). mutant receptors in which various combinationsof s r r i n r clussmallerNCSphosphopeptides
of 22 and 23 kDa (Fig.
Third, when a tryptophan residue was inserted
by site-directed
ters wereeliminated by site-dirrctrd mutagrnrsis and anamutagenesis after His%'35 within the C-terminal domain
in mu- lyzed these for their capacitirs
tn undrrgo ligand-induced mndia fications.Asdemonstrated
t a n t 335W336 (see Fig. 1). theNCStreatmentproduced
by immunoblotting(Fig.
5.4 I.
smaller 17-kDa phosphopeptide, indicating that the
novel NCS elimination of clusters 2, 3, or 4 in cm234 and cm3 rand cm2
site had been introduced into the phosphorylated region (Fig.
andcm4,notshown)doesnotimpairthecA.MP-dcprndrnt
3 C ) . These observations support the view that both basal and transition in elrctrophorrtic mobility. Thus, nonrof the serinrs
stimulated phosphorylation sites are primarily located in the
of clusters 2. 3 , or 4 is necrssary for this property. In contrast.
C-terminal domain.
elimination of the cluster 1 serinrs in c m l . cm13. cm12.3. and
Phosphopeptide Mapping-As an initial approach to further cm1234 results in rrcrptors which do not rxhihit thr typical

A

1

2

3

4

-

Phosphorylation Sites in a Dictyostelium CAMP Receptor

7040
A 1 2 3 4

C

6 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

5 6 7 8

Wt

JK365

- + - +

"

-45

- L

rl) -21
- 14.3

I

-12

c

11

- 3.5

I

29 -

a 0

4

20 -

e

IU

14FIG.3. Localization of phosphorylation sites to the C-terminal domain.A, membranes prepared from 32P-labeled, developed AX3 cells
containing cARl+-p were treatedfor 45 min with0.1 (lanes I and 5 ) , 1(lanes 2 and 6).10 (lanes 3 and 7), and 100
(lanes 4 and8! pqml trypsin
and subjected to centrifugation. The resulting pellets (lunes 1 4 ) and supernatants (lanes 5 6 ) were subjected immunopreapltatlon w t h C
terminus-specific antiserumfollowed by SDS-PAGE and autoradiography.An arrow marks theposition ofintact cAR1. The higher molecular weight
band is most likely aggregated cAR1. Labeled material near the dye front in lunes I 4 is presumed to be phospholipid. B, affinity-purified,
(lunes 3 and 4 ) were prepared from developed AX3 cells.
32P-labeled C-terminal domains derivedfrom cARldP (lanes I and 2) and cAR1,Similarly, those derivedfrom w
t
(lanes 5 and 6 ) and wt+-p (lanes 7 and 8 )were preparedfrom vegetative cAR1-expressing transformants.
Samples inodd lanes received no further treatment; those in
euen lanes were digested for 6 h withLys-C. C , NCS digestsof 32P-labeledwt",
w t , ~ JK365-p,
,
JK365+cAMp,
and 335W336,are shown analyzedby SDS-PAGE followed byautoradiography. Under theconditions used,
NCS is known to yield incomplete digests (24)which probably accounts for many of the high molecular weight phosphopeptides present in the
digests shown. This is strongly suggested by the JK365 digests inwhich their mobilities are systematically increased compared with those in
wild-type digests. Similarly, the prominent 27 kDa band derived
from 335W336 probably results from failed cleavage at thesite of the inserted
tryptophan. In this and subsequent figures, molecular massesof standards areshown in m a .

1

2

3

4

5

6

7
4

8

wt
cm13
cm123
cm3
cml
cm234
cm1234
"
"
"
-

- 45
- 29

- + - + - + - + - + - + - +

A

- 21
- 14
- 6.5

- 3.5

B

D

b I

a
4

FIG.5. Electrophoretic behavior and phosphate labeling of
serine cluster mutants.Samples were prepared from unstimulated
(-) and CAMP-stimulated (+) 32Pi-labeledcells expressing wild-type or
FIG.4. Time course of Lys-C digestion of the C-terminal d e mutated cARl as indicated, subjected to SDS-PAGE, and electrophoretically transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. A , cARl immunomain. Affinity-purified, 32P-labeledC-terminal domainfrom cARlwas subjectedto Lys-C digestion followed by SDS-PAGE and autoradi- blot. The membrane wasprobed with cAR1-specific antiserum followed
Corp.). Inthe example
ography. Lune I , untreated; lane 2 . 6 h with sample buffer and Lys-C by chemiluminescentdetection(Amersham
added; lune 3 , 6 h with no added enzyme; lanes 4-7,30 min, 60 min, 2 shown, cm3 shifted incompletely presumably due to inadequate expocomplete in other experiments not shown.
B,
h, and 6 h with
Lys-C; lane 8.6 h with Lys-C added a t 0 h, 2 h, and 4 h.sure to CAMP its shift is
cAR1-associated 32Pi.The nitrocellulose membrane shown in panel A
d f , dye front.
was subsequently rinsed in buffer containing azide to eliminate residual chemiluminescence and subjected to autoradiography to detect
ligand-induced electrophoretic shift indicating that phospho- 32P.cm123, cm234, and cm1234 were analyzedin a separate experiment
therefore, cannot be directly compared with the other samples
rylation within cluster1underlies themajor transition in mo- and,
shown. Arrowheads mark the positionsof wt-(filled)and wt+bility. A slight CAMP-induced decrease in mobility is evident in (unfilled). Note that mutants in which cluster 3 is deleted have incml andcm13, but notcm123 and cm1234. This may be dueto creased mobilities.

CAMP-stimulated phosphorylation of cluster 2; however, we did
not investigate this further.
The mutant receptors deficient in 1 or more serine clusters
were also analyzed for their abilities to undergo basal and
cAMF"stimu1ated phosphorylation. Our observations,illustrated in Fig. 5B,are summarized as follows: (i) cm123 (and
cm1234) does not incorporate detectable amounts of 32Pproviding further confirmation that the C-terminaldomain is the
principal site of both basal andcAMP-stimulated phosphoryla-

tion and indicating that neither
of the 2 serines of cluster 4 is
phosphorylated to a significant extent. (ii)cm234 exhibits only
ligand-dependentphosphorylation, indicating that cluster 1
contains a site (or sites) for stimulated, but not basal, phosphorylation. (iii)cm13, which has only clusters 2 and 4, exhibits
both basal and ligand-stimulatedphosphorylation. Since cluster 4 does not appear to undergo phosphorylation, this indicates that cluster
2 contains sitesfor both basal and stimulated

Phosphorylation
Sites

in a Dictyosteliurn CAMP Receptor

7041

nation that roughly four phosphates are added in response to
ligand (12).
are
The extentsof phosphorylation of UTt-mp and cm2.-p
nearly equal, suggesting that cluster
2 accounts for only a
minorfraction of basal phosphorylation. The low extent of
phosphorylation of ~ m l 3 - - ~ suggests thatmuch of the basal
phosphorylation resides within cluster 3. The brief labeling
conditions employed may underestimate the amount of basal
phosphorylation since it requires the turnover of cAR1-bound
phosphate.
Analysis of the Serine Cluster Mutants by PeptideMapping-In order to confirm the proposed identities of the Lys-C
phosphopeptides, the 32P-labeled serine cluster mutants were
digested with Lys-C and analyzed bySDS-PAGE. For these
+CAMP
-CAMP
Difference
experiments, intact receptors, rather than C-terminal tryptic
FIG.6. Quantitationofmutantreceptorphosphorylation.
fragments, were digested with Lys-C, and the products were
cAFl1-associated 32Pand -1
protein were quantitated as described
analyzed using a n electrophoretic system designed to resolve
under “Materials and Methods” for wild-type and selected mutant recomparison of the standard
ceptors. For each sample, relative specific radioactivity was calculated low molecular weight peptides. For
and
as the ratio of CAR1 32Pand cARl protein and normalized to that of and low molecular weight gel systems, digests of wt--P
wt+-p.
Two determinations made for each sample (indicated by brackwt+cAMpwere resolved by each. The 11- and 10-kDa peptides
ets) were averaged. The differences between unstimulated and CAMP- seen previously, believed to contain clusters 2 and 3, appear as
stimulated values obtained for each receptor type are also shown and
large phosphopeptides ranging in apparentsize from roughly 6
reflect the ligand-dependent component of phosphorylation.
to 15 kDa on the standard gel (Fig. 7A, left). The material
running with the tracking dye, believed to contain cluster 1,
digest. When the low
phosphorylation. (iv) Substitution of cluster 2 (mutant cm2) again was only present in the wt+-p
fails to eliminate basal phosphorylation indicating that it oc- molecular weight system was used (Fig. 7A, right), all of the
phosphorylated
species
had
higher
apparent
molecular
curs on sites outside of cluster 2 (not shown). Sites within
with the trackingdye
cluster 3 likely account for this basalphosphorylation since, as weights, and the material that migrated
on standard gels was resolved into severaldiscrete species with
discussed above, cm234 and cm123 argue that sites within
apparent sizes of -4 kDa and below.
clusters 1 and 4, respectively, are not basally phosphorylated.
When digests of mutants were analyzed, several observa(v) cm124 exhibits basal phosphorylation butlittle, if any,
encompass bothclusters
CAMP-stimulated phosphorylation (not shown). This result and tions verified that the large fragments
between
analysis of a Lys-C digest of cm2 (see below) suggest thatphos- 2 and 3. First, when a tryptophan residue was inserted
phorylation of cluster 3 is largely basal. Thisis consistent with clusters 2 and 3, these Lys-C phosphopeptides were rendered
the largeCAMP-stimulated increase inphosphorylation of cm3 susceptible to cleavage by NCS (Fig. 7B 1. Second, these species
are absentfrom Lys-C digests of cm234 which lacks both clus(Fig. 5B).
Quantitation of the Extent of Phosphorylation of Serine ters 2 and 3 (Fig. 7C). Third, as noted previously and demonClusters-Since clusters 1, 2, and 3 appeared to account for strated in Fig. 7, the large Lys-C phosphopeptides from wt
most of the CAR1 phosphorylation, we decided to compare the exhibit an increase in32Piincorporation and a slight increase
extents of phosphorylation of wt, cm2, and cm13. 32P-Labeled in electrophoretic mobility upon stimulation with CAMP.Those
wild-type and mutant receptors,derived from CAMP-stimu- peptides derived from cm2, however, exhibit neither of these
lated or unstimulatedcells, were immunoblotted, permitting a properties (Fig. 7 0 . This observation alsoconfirms that cluster
quantitative measurementof phosphorylation as described un- 3 is not a major site of cAMP-stimulatedphosphorylation.
der “Materials and Methods.” The ratioof cARl-associated 32P Lastly, the largeLys-C phosphopeptides derived from cm13 are
to CAR1 protein was determined for each sample, and these
smaller as would be expected due to the deletion of cluster 3
as depicted in Fig. 6. (Fig. 7 0 .
ratios werenormalized to thatof wt+-p
cm2,,and ~ m l 3 + - ~yielded values of 0.64 and 0.32, reThe small Lys-C phosphopeptides were confirmed to contain
spectively, consistent with their having reduced amounts of cluster 1 since these were absent from digests of cml+-p
Significantly, the sum which lacks cluster 1(Fig. 7C). (The origin of the minor -4.4phosphorylation comparedwith wt+-p.
of these values is approximately 1. This is consistent with the kDa species in this digest is unknown.) Conversely, the collecsupposition that clusters 1,2, and 3 account for the large ma- tion of small phosphopeptides was unalteredby the elimination
jority of phosphorylation. It also suggests that the clusters are of clusters 2,3, and4 in cm234 (Fig. 7 0 . The heterogeneity of
phosphorylated independently of one another.
this cluster1-containing peptide may reflect different patterns
The values determined
for CAMP-stimulated samples reflect of phosphorylation or alternative cleavage products resulting
the sum of both basal and CAMP-dependent incorporation of from the utilization of different sites by Lys-C among the 4
32P. The ligand-dependent component of phosphorylation (i.e. closely spaced lysineresidues at its N-terminal end (see
Fig. 1).
the difference between stimulated and basal values) for each
DISCUSSION
mutant is shown in Fig. 6. These values indicate thatroughly
one-third of ligand-dependent phosphorylation is found within
Stimulation of cells with CAMPtriggers anincrease in phoscluster 2 and that the remainingtwo-thirds of ligand-depend- phorylation and a decrease in the electrophoretic mobility of
ent phosphorylation occur in clusters 1 and/or 3. Since cluster cAR1. The kinetics and dose dependence of these two processes
3 appears not to be a target of ligand-dependent phosphoryla- are similar. Treatment of CARl+-p
with alkaline phosphatase
tion, two-thirds of ligand-dependent phosphorylationmost
resulted in the removal of phosphate and a consequent delikely occur within cluster 1. These values could be accommo- crease in apparentsize so that it comigrated with CAR^-,-^,
dated if, upon binding CAMP, cARl is phosphorylated on 2 demonstrating the electrophoretic mobility shift produced in
serines in cluster 1and 1serine in cluster2. This supposition vivo upon stimulation is a direct result of phosphate addition.
agrees reasonably well with our previously reported determi- We have previously shown that once the transition from 40 to

A

CAMP Receptor

Phosphorylation
Dictyostelium
a in
Sites

7042
standard

+

B

LMW

- +

CAMP:
NCS:

- - + +
- + - +

43 -

29

-

18 14

-

,m

6.2 -

Electrophoretic

Mobility Shift

3.0 -

C

wt

- 4-

cml

cm234

- +

7

Induced

cm2

- + - +

\

wt

cm13

Cluster

394
331

I

/
FIG.7. Lys-C phosphopeptides derived from wild-type and mutant forms of cAR1. "P-Labeled receptors purified from unstimulated
(-) and CAMP-stimulated (+) cells were digested with Lys-C. Unless
specified otherwise, the resulting phosphopeptides were subjected to
low molecular weight SDS-PAGE followed by autoradiography. A, digests of wtdP
and wt,-p
were analyzed by standard SDS-PAGE
( l e f t )and low molecular weight SDS-PAGE (right).B, Lys-C digests of
335W336 are shownwith or without subsequent NCS treatment as
indicated. C , Lys-C digests of wild-type cAR1, cm234, cml, cm2, and
cm13 are shown. At the right,only cAMP-stimulated samplesof wt and
cm13 are shown.
43 kDa has occurred, this form can acquire additional phosphates without a further increase in apparentmolecular mass
(11).Thus, not all of these phosphates are required
to produce
the apparent size change.
The hydrophilic C-terminal domain of cAR1 was revealed as
the major site of both basal and ligand-induced phosphorylation. Upon trypsinization of membranes isolated from unstimulated and stimulatedcells labeled in vivo with 32Pi,soluble 18and 19-kDa phosphopeptides were released which could be immunoprecipitated with a cARl C terminus-specific antiserum.
Their large size, solubility, and immunoreactivity suggest that
these polypeptides represent much of the C-terminalcytoplasmic domain as defined in the topological model of cARl (4).
Consistent with this was the finding that the radiolabel appeared in a large NCS fragment which was made smaller by
C-terminal truncation of cARl or insertion of a novel NCS
cleavage site within the C-terminal domain.
The 18 serines in the C-terminal domain are organized in
four clusters as illustrated in Fig. 1. To determine how the
multiple sites of phosphorylation are distributed among these
four clusters, we took two independent approaches. The first
was a proteolytic analysis in which the trypsin-released do-

360
361
362
363
364

A 3:;

368

Cluster 4

383

385

FIG.8. Model of C A R 1 phosphorylation. Serines of the C-terminal
domain, numbered relative to the N-terminal methionine, and their
assignments to one of four clusters are indicated. The model of CAR1
phosphorylation described in the text is depicted to the left of the Cterminal domain. The relative distributionof ligand-induced and basal
phosphorylation is roughly indicated by arrow width. The electrophoretic mobility shift results from ligand-induced phosphorylation within
cluster 1.

main was furtherdigested with Lys-C. Characterization of the
phosphopeptide products strongly suggested
that serine cluster
1was only phosphorylated in response to ligand and thatcluster 2 andor cluster 3 contained the sitesof basal phosphorylation and some ligand-induced phosphorylation. The second approach, which verified and extended these conclusions, utilized
site-directed mutants in which serine clusters invarious combinations were eliminated. These were examinedfor their ability to be phosphorylated and undergo the ligand-induced electrophoretic mobility shift.
In
addition, the
extents
of
phosphorylation of selected mutants were quantitated. Taken
together, our findings are consistentwith the model depicted in
Fig. 8. Serine cluster1 contains only stimulus-dependent sites,
including that required for the ligand-induced electrophoretic
mobility shift. Cluster 2 contains basal and stimulus-dependent sites. The stimulusinduces the addition of approximately
two phosphates to cluster 1 and one to cluster 2. Basal phos-

Phosphorylation
in
Sites

a Dictyostelium CAMPReceptor

7043

phorylation occurs predominately in cluster 3 and to a lesser enylyl cyclase gene.3 We previously demonstrated a cARl phosphorylating activity in the CHAPS-insoluble fraction of cells
extent in cluster2.
Serine cluster 1 has the attributes of a regulatory region. which was enhanced by pretreatment of cells with cAMP (37).
This cluster, among the four, undergoes the most dramatic More recently, Meier and Klein (38)reported a CAMP receptor
which could
change in response to stimulation, having no basal sites and kinase activity in plasma membrane preparations
clus- be stimulated by cAMP in uitro. The cARl kinase is evidently
acquiring perhapstwo modifications. Two of the serines in
ter 1, SerZg9 and Sego4, are
conserved in all four C A R S (7, €9.' expressed in both growing and aggregation stage cells since the
We have previously reported that cAR2 and cAR3 also exhibit phosphorylation of overexpressed cARl in growing cells is inCAMP-induced phosphorylation (7). It is possible that the con- distinguishable from that in developed cells. The same kinase
may also phosphorylatecAR2, c A R 3 , and cAR4; the highly conserved serines of cluster 1 are phosphorylated and mediate
similar functions in all of the C A R S . The importanceof cluster served intracellular loops of the four C A R S (7, SI2 might facilitate theirrecognition by a single kinase. Our new understand2 cannot be dismissed. Two of the serines in this cluster are
ing of the distribution of CAMP-induced phosphorylation sites
conserved in cAR2 and could mediate properties specific to
of CAR1should allow us todevelop a n accurate in uitro assay for
these two receptor subtypes.
the CARkinase utilizing appropriate synthetic peptides.
The ligand-induced electrophoretic mobility shift caused by
In the models put forth to explain uncoupling in the mamphosphorylation within cluster 1 possibly reflects an ionic in- malian systems, auxiliary proteinsof the arrestin family bind
teraction, which persistsduring electrophoresis,between a to the phosphorylated receptors and interfere with functional
phosphoserine in cluster 1 and an adjacentbasic residue. The interaction between the ligand-activated receptor and targetG
residues involved might be Se3O4 and A r $ O 5 . In cAR2 which proteins (reviewed in Ref. 1). These events essentially neutralalso exhibits a ligand-induced mobility shift (261, Sego3(which ize the excited receptor, allowing the G protein to return to its
corresponds to Se1304in CAR1)is flanked on either side by basic basal state. In contrast, evidence suggests the mechanism of
residues. In contrast, CAR3 does not undergo an apparent mo- adaptation differs in Dictyostelium. It appears that cARl sigbility shift and lacks a corresponding basic residue (7). It re- nals to downstream components which are the actual sites of
mains to be determined whether the electrophoretic mobility adaptation. We and others have shown that GTP-yS, presumshift has a functional correlate in uiuo.
ably acting independentlyof receptors, stimulates adenylyl cyIn a wide variety of G protein-linked receptor systems such clase activity in cell lysates. However, in lysates from adapted
as those mediating vision and hormone action in vertebrates cells, GTP-yS can no longer stimulate theadenylyl cyclase (39,
and pheromone sensing in yeast, desensitization phenomena
40). This adaptationdoes not occur in carl- cells, demonstratprevent cells from continuously respondingto persistent stimu- ing that thereceptor is required for this process to occur (41).
to express thephosphorylationWe are currently attempting
lation. Processes which contribute to desensitization include
deficient cARl mutantsdescribed here incarl- cells which will
uncoupling of the signaling pathways, loss of ligand binding
sites without receptor loss, and receptor degradation (reviewed enable us to determine the importance of cARl phosphorylain Ref. 1).All of these processes occur in Dictyostelium (27). The tion to adaptation and the developmental program. Our preprocess we havetermedadaptation,
which reversibly un- liminary evidence indicates thatcarl- cells expressing cm1234
couples cARl from several effectors including adenylyl cyclase, develop abnormally which presumably reflects the physiologiregulates the periodic waves of cAMP which direct thecells to cal importance of cARl phosphorylation. The collection of mumove to aggregation centers. Adaptationmay also enhance the tants described here will enable us to determine which of the
capacity of these cells to senseshallow gradients of cAMP (28). serine clusters areresppnsible for the phenotype observed for
be more
In eachof these systems,evidence suggests thatligand-induced cm1234. Important sites within these clusters can
precisely
localized
by
substitution
of
the
individual
serines
and
phosphorylation of theC-terminal cytoplasmic domains or
third intracellular loops of the receptor is involved in the de- their phosphorylation confirmed by Edman degradationof isosensitization (reviewed in Ref. l).These observations suggest a lated peptides.
remarkable evolutionary
conservation
of this
regulatory
Acknowledgments-We thank Lijun Wu for critically reading the
mechanism.
manuscript and Charles Saxe and Michael Caterina for valuable disLigand-induced phosphorylation of G protein-linked recep- cussions. We also thank Candy DeBerry and Jaimie Flores-Riveros for
tors is mediated by CAMP-dependent protein kinase in some helpful discussions concerning immunoaffinity chromatographyand
phosphopeptide mapping. Peggy Ford providedexpert secretarial assisinstances and, more generally, by members of a recently de- tance.
fined familyof receptor kinases. Thefamily includesrhodopsin
REFERENCES
kinase (29), two closely related P-adrenergic receptor kinases
1. Dohlman, H. G., Thorner, J., Caron, M. G., and Lefkowitz, R. J. (1991)Annu.
(Refs. 30, 31), and two homologues in Drosophila (32). The
Reu. Biochern. 60,653-688
receptor kinases appear to be activated when they bind to li2. Deweotes, P. (1989)Science 245, 1054-1058
3. Firtel, R.A. (1991)ZFends Genet. 7,381-388
gand-occupied receptors (33, 34). Synthetic peptides have imP. S., Sun, T. J., Saxe, C. L., Kimmel, A. R., Johnson, R. L., and
plicated interactions between p-adrenergic receptorkinase and 4. Klein,
Devreotes, P. N. (1988)Science 241, 1467-1472
the first and third cytoplasmic loops of the p-adrenergic recep5. Saxe, C. L.,Johnson, R., Deweotes, P. N., andKimmel, A. R. (1991)Deu.
tor (35).In addition to activating the kinase, these interactions Genet. 12,613
6. Sun,T. J., and Devreotes, P. N.(1991)Genes & Deu. 5,572-582
may serve to position it and, thereby, play a role in phospho7. Johnson, R. L., Saxe, C. L.,Gollop, R., Kimmel, A. R., and Devreotes, P. N.
(1993)Genes & Deu. 7,273-282
rylation site determination. Other studies with
peptide sub8. Saxe, C. L., Ginsburg, G . T., Louis, J. M., Johnson, R., Devreotes, P. N., and
strates suggest that
both P-adrenergic receptorkinase andrhoKimmel, A. R.(1993)Genes & Deu. 7,262-272
9. Dinauer, M. C., Steck, T. L., and Devreotes, P. N. (1980)J . Cell Biol. 86,
dopsin kinase prefer to phosphorylate sites with nearby acidic
554-561
residues (36).
10. Dinauer, M. C., Steck, T. L., and Devreotes, P. N. (1980)J. Cell Biol. 86,
Presumably there is a p-adrenergic receptor kinase-like re545-553
11. Vaughan, R. A., and Devreotes, P. N. (1988)J. Biol. Chem. 283,1453%14543
ceptor kinase inDictyostelium. Protein kinaseA probably does 12.
Klein, P., Vaughan, R., Borleis, J., and Devreotes, P. (1987)J. Biol. Chem.282,
not phosphorylate cARl since it does not contain evident pro35-64
tein kinase A target sequences, and the reaction is insensitive
to inhibitors of CAMPsynthesis (12) and disruptionof the adD. Hereld and G . Pitt, unpublished observation

7044

PhosphorylationDictyostelium
Sites
a in CAMP

13. Kunkel, T.A,, Roberts, J. D., and Zakour, R. A. (1987)Methods Enzymol. 164,
367-383
14. Johnson, R. L., Vaughan, R. A,, Caterina, M. J., Van Haastert, P. J. M., and
Devreotes, P. N. (1991)Biochemistry SO, 69826986
15. Pitt. G . S.. Milona, N.. Borleis, J., Lin,K. C.. Reed, R. R., and Devreotes, P. N.
(1992)Cell 60,305315
16. Dynes, J. L., and Firtel, R. A. (1989)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 86,7966
7970
17. Demotes, P., Fontana, D., Klein, P., Schemng, J., and Theibert, A. (1987)
Methods Cell Biol. 28, 299-331
18. Klein, P., Knox, B., Borleis, J., and Devreotes, P. (1987)J. Biol. Chem. 262,
352-357
19. Klein, P., Fontana, D., Knox, B., Theibert, A,, and Devreotes, P. (1985)Cold
Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 60, 787-799
20. Boyle, W. J., Van der Geer, P., and Hunter, T.(1991)Methods Enzymol. 201,
110-149
21. Schneider, C., Newman, R. A,, Sutherland, D. R., Asser, U., and Greaves,M. F.
(1982)J. Biol. Chem. 267, 1076€-10769
22. Laemmli, U.K. (1970)Nature 227,680-685
23. Hoefer Scientific Instruments 1992-1993 product catalog, pp. 131-132, San
Francisco
24. Lischwe, M. A,, and Ochs, D. (1982)
And. Biochem. 127,453A57
25. Tao, Y., and Klein, C. (1990)J. Biol. Chem. 266,15584-15589
26. Johnson, R. L., Gundersen, R., Hereld, D., Pitt, G. S . , Tugendreich, S., Saxe, C.,
Kimmel, A. R., and Devreotes, P. N. (1992)Cold Spring Harbor Symp.
Quant. Biol. 67, 169-176
27. Van Haastert, P. J . M., Wang, M., Bominaar, A. A,, Devreotes, P. N., and
~~

Receptor

Schaap, P.(1992)Mol. Biol. Cell 3, 603-612
28. Van Haastert, P. J. M. (1983)J. Cell Biol. 96, 1559-1565
29. Lorenz, W., Inglese, J., Palczewski, K, Onorato, J. J., Caron, M. G., and
Lefkowitz, R. J. (1991)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 88,8715-3719
30. Benovic, J. L., DeBlasi, A,, Stone, W. C., Caron, M. G., and Lefkowitz, R. J.
(1989)Science 246,235-240
31. Benovic, J. L., Onorato, J. J., Arriza,J. L., Stone, W. C., Lohse, M., Jenkins, N.
A,, Gilbert, D. J., Copeland,N. G., Caron, M. G., and Lefkowitz, R. J. (1991)
J. Biol. Chem. 266, 14939-14946
32. Cassill, J. A., Whitney, M., Joazeiro, A. P., Becker, A., and Zuker, C. S . (1991)
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S . A. 88, 11067-11070
33. Palczewski, K., Buczylko, J., Kaplan, M.W., Polans, A. S . , and Crabb, J. W.
(1991)J. Biol. Chem. 266,1294%12955
34. Chen, C.-Y., Dion, S . B., Kim, C. M., and Benovic, J. L. (1993)J. Biol. Chem.
268,7825-7831
35. Benovic, J. L.,Onorato, J., Lohse, M. J., Dohlman, H. G . , Staniszewski, C.,
Caron, M. G., and Lekowitz,R. J. (1990)Br. J. Clin. Pharmacal. SO, 3s-12s
36. Onorato, J.J.,Palczewski, K, Regan, J. W., Caron, M. G., Lefkowitz, R. J., and
Benovic J. L. (1991)Biochemistry 30,5118-5125
37. Klein, P., Theibert, A,, Fontana, D., and Devreotes, P. (1985)J . Biol. Chem.
260, 1757-1764
38. Meier, K., and Klein, C. (1988)Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 86,2181-2185
39. Theibert, A., and Demotes, P. N.(1986)J. Biol. Chem. 261, 15121-15125
40. Van Haastert, P. J. M., SnaarJagalska, B. E., and Janssens, P.M.W. (1987)
Eul: J. Biochem. 162,251-258
41. Pupillo, M., Insall, R., Pitt, G . S . , and Devreotes,P. N. (1992)Mol. Biol. Cell 9,
1229-1234

