Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Biased excitable networks: how cells direct motion
in response to gradients
Pablo A Iglesias1 and Peter N Devreotes2
The actin cytoskeleton in motile cells has many of the hallmarks
of an excitable medium, including the presence of propagating
waves. This excitable behavior can account for the
spontaneous migration of cells. A number of reports have
suggested that the chemoattractant-mediated signaling can
bias excitability, thus providing a means by which cell motility
can be directed. In this review, we discuss some of these
observations and theories proposed to explain them. We also
suggest a mechanism for cell polarity that can be incorporated
into the existing framework.
Addresses
1
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Johns Hopkins
University, 3400 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218, United States
2
Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 725 N.
Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, United States
Corresponding authors: Iglesias, Pablo A (pi@jhu.edu) and Devreotes,
Peter N (pnd@jhmi.edu)

Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2012, 24:245–253
This review comes from a themed issue on
Cell regulation
Edited by Caroline Hill and Linda van Aelst

understood in neutrophils and in the social amoebae,
Dictyostelium discoideum [5]. Dictyostelium cells rely on
chemotaxis to find nutrients. When starved, they also
acquire the ability to chemotax in response to cAMP
gradients in a developmental process that enables them
to aggregate and survive. The amoeboid motility of
neutrophils and Dictyostelium cells involves the localized
dynamic extension and retraction of pseudopodia. In
unstimulated cells, this rhythmic pattern repeats itself
without an obvious spatial bias leading to random cell
migration. By contrast, the imposition of a chemoattractant gradient provides a guidance cue that biases this
stochastic activity and thereby steers cells in the direction
of highest chemoattractant concentration.
Recent years have seen a growing number of reports
showing that the actin cytoskeleton and the signal transduction events which regulate it behave as an excitable
media (Figure 1a, Video S1). More recently, models have
been proposed that describe how this random activity can
be steered by the chemoattractant gradient. Here we
review these findings, and also suggest a means by which
polarity can be incorporated into these models.

Available online 10th December 2011
0955-0674/$ – see front matter
# 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI 10.1016/j.ceb.2011.11.009

Introduction
How cells sense and move along chemical gradients,
referred to as directed migration or chemotaxis, is one of
the fundamental questions in cell biology. This fascinating
process plays a crucial role in normal physiological as well as
pathological events, from the proper functioning of the
immune system to cancer metastasis [1]. Research into
chemotaxis is also an area where collaboration between
experimental and computational biologists has been fruitful, leading to an increasing number of models that explain
many aspects of the response [2,3]. A consensus has
emerged that in order to understand chemotaxis, we must
be able to answer several separable but interrelated questions [4]. What drives spontaneous cell motility? How do
cells read external chemoattractant gradients? How do the
external cues direct the otherwise random motility? How
do cells become polarized?
Though chemotaxis is observed in a large number of cells,
the mechanisms used to direct eukaryotic cells are best
www.sciencedirect.com

Excitable behavior in cells
Probably one of the best examples of how biology can
motivate a whole new branch of applied mathematics is
the study of excitable systems. In biology, the classical
model of an excitable system is that proposed by Hodgkin
and Huxley to explain the ‘all-or-nothing’ characteristic
of action potentials in neurons [6]. Perturbations of excitable systems can be either subthreshold, simply dying
out, or superthreshold, eliciting a full response. When the
excitable elements are spatially distributed, as they are
along an axon, the system is said to be an excitable
medium. In this case, a triggered response gives rise to
a propagated wave of activity that travels along the
medium and, thus, propagated waves are a signature of
excitability. FitzHugh and Nagumo created a simplified
mathematical model that recreated the dynamics of the
Hodgkin-Huxley model [7,8]. The FitzHugh–Nagumo
model belongs to a common class of systems known as
activator–inhibitor systems (Figure 1b, Table 1). In these
systems one component acts as an activator, as it includes
an autocatalytic loop and also turns on the second
element, the inhibitor, which provides negative feedback
to the activator. Because they only include two components, activator–inhibitor systems can be described
by an analytically tractable set of equations facilitating
their analysis.
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2012, 24:245–253

246 Cell regulation

Figure 1

(a)

(b)
positive
feedback

external
signal

positive
feedback

recruitment

X
feedforward
connection

basal membrane

negative
feedback

Y
(c)
Y-nullcline

d
e

Y level

diffusion

X-nullcline

a

c

b

negative
feedback

X level
(d)

wave
propagation

Y

level

X

threshold

a

b c

d e

time

a

Current Opinion in Cell Biology

Wave propagation in excitable media. (a) This cartoon illustrates one possible way in which excitable systems involving an activator (green) and an inhibitor
(red) can give rise to propagating waves. Functional (shaded) molecules of the activator recruit and activate like molecules in an autocatalytic, positive
feedback loop as well as inhibitory molecules (red) that act in a negative feedback loop to turn off signaling. Though the activator can diffuse throughout,
the presence of the inhibitor in one direction leads to wave propagation in the other direction. (b) Schematic of an activator (X)–inhibitor (Y) system. The
autocatalytic loop endows the system with a threshold of activation. External signals, which may include stochastic perturbations, can trigger the excitable
network (EN) when they are sufficiently large to overcome the threshold. (c) Phase-plane analysis of the EN. This plot shows the two nullclines (dotted gray
lines) – curves for which the levels of X or Y are constant over time. The intersection between the two denotes the equilibrium (circled). Absent a
perturbation, the system remains at this point (labeled a). However, a disturbance can move the state to another point in the plane (e.g. b). The blue arrows
show the direction and velocity of the trajectory. In the case shown by the black solid line, a superthreshold increase in the level of X causes a subsequent
large change (due to the positive feedback loop) which moves the state to point c. At this point the negative feedback loop starts to dominate and begins to
lower the level of X. Between points c and d, the amount of inhibition (level of Y) continues to increase, accelerating the drop in X which is rapid between
points d and e. Thereafter, Y decreases (between e and a) as the system relaxes to its equilibrium. (d) Plots of X and Y as a function of time, labeled to
correspond to the phase plane points. Perturbations below the threshold do not trigger large deviations.

The presence of wave-like behavior, and hence excitability, in the actin cytoskeleton of Dictyostelium was first
reported by Vicker et al. [9] who imaged fixed cells stained
by phalloidin-rhodamine. Subsequent observations in live
cells have confirmed the existence of these cytoskeletal
waves [10–13]. Actin-binding proteins (e.g. Arp2/3, LimE,
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2012, 24:245–253

coronin) or Scar/WAVE complex components (e.g. Hem-1
in neutrophils and Hspc300 in Dictyostelium) are recruited
from the cytosol to foci on the basal surface and give rise to
waves of recruitment that propagate outwards [14,15].
Myosin-IB is found enriched at the front edge of the wave,
coronin at the rear and Arp2/3 throughout [16]. When
www.sciencedirect.com

Biased excitable networks Iglesias and Devreotes 247

Table 1
Summary of model types
Model type

Type

Excitable network (EN)

Stochastic, reaction-diffusion

Activator–inhibitor

Reaction system, can also incorporate
diffusion and stochastic perturbations
Stochastic, reaction-diffusion

FitzHugh–Nagumo

Biased excitable
network (BEN)

Stochastic, reaction-diffusion

Local-excitation,
global-inhibition (LEGI)
LEGI–BEN

Deterministic, reaction-diffusion
Modular, stochastic, reaction-diffusion

waves reach the cell membrane they probably supply the
force, through actin polymerization, needed to push it
forward [10,15–17]. As such, wave propagation and extinction is related to extensions and retractions of pseudopods.
When any of these waves collide, they annihilate each
other, which is consistent with the behavior of activator–
inhibitor systems. In Dictyostelium, recruitments of Ras
binding domains (a measure of activation of multiple
Ras proteins) and PH-domains (a measure of PIP3 accumulation) are propagated in phase with waves of cytoskeletal
activity that reach the cell cortex ([18]; Video S1). Signaling events upstream of the cytoskeleton also display
excitable behavior.
These excitable behaviors are seen in cells that are not
stimulated by chemoattractant as well as in Dictyostelium
cells lacking the Gb-subunit, indicating that the chemoattractant receptor and associated G-proteins are upstream
of and not part of the excitable network [16]. However,
chemoattractant signaling can dramatically perturb the
system. Application of a spatially uniform stimulus triggers rapid, global recruitment to the membrane of most of
the proteins showing excitable behavior. Within 30 s, this
response disappears and then is followed by a series of
further recruitments at random sites, appearing as flashes
of fluorescence, which occur over the next several minutes before the prestimulus spontaneous behavior
resumes (Figure 2). These secondary flashes of activity
match the second phase of biochemically monitored
events and the ‘patches’ of PIP3 accumulation seen using
fluorescent microscopy [19]. Though waves originate at
random on the basal surface, most of the excitable behavior in polarized cells [15] or cells tracking toward a
chemoattractant-filled micropipette [18] is found preferentially near the leading edge.
The overall existence of excitable behavior is quite robust
though this may represent the presence of multiple
www.sciencedirect.com

Properties explained
Random migration, wave propagation,
bursting phenomena
Can be used to represent
excitable networks
N/A. An early example of an EN based
on an activator–inhibitor system that is
analytically tractable
Random and chemotactic migration.
Actin wave propagation. Does not explain
adaptation or relative sensitivity
to varying gradients
Adaptation, static gradient sensing and
relative sensitivity to gradients
A type of BEN that combines properties
of LEGI and BEN models. Does not explain
polarization or persistence

References
[21–24]

[7,8]

[25,28,36,37]

[30,31]
[18]

excitable systems. Eliminating the SCAR/WAVE complex or myosin-II does not impair wave formation or
extinguish them [16]. Wave patterns can even be
observed in certain cells in which the actin cytoskeleton
is disrupted through the addition of polymerization
inhibitors, though only in special situations. Synchronous,
phase shifted rotation of PIP3 and actin has been observed
in cells lacking amiB (a gene required for aggregation
whose absence leads to aberrant cell morphology) that
had been treated with a low dose of Latrunculin A [20].
Reciprocal waves of PIP3 and PTEN are also seen in
Latrunculin-treated Dictyostelium cells that are treated
with caffeine [21]. In both these cases, the period of
oscillation of the waves (3–5 min) is slower than that
of cells with intact cytoskeleton, suggesting that these
oscillatory behaviors probably differ from the excitable
behavior that leads to actin waves.

Models of excitable behavior
Activator–inhibitor models of excitable behavior are now
being used to explain the waves seen in chemotactic cells
(Table 1). To explain the observed Hem-1 waves in
neutrophils, Weiner et al. proposed Hem-1 as the activator,
actin as the inhibitor and an autocatalytic step which
represents the activation (recruitment to the membrane)
of Hem-1. Simulations recreate several observed behaviors, including the formation of propagating waves, the
annihilation of colliding wave fronts and the way that
depolymerization of the actin cytoskeleton freezes waves.
Whitelam et al. used the FitzHugh–Nagumo equations to
explain the presence of stationary spots and their transition
to moving waves as observed in Dictyostelium cells [22]. The
activator is substrate-bound actin, the autocatalytic step
involves the recruitment by Arp2/3 to the growing ends of
fibers and the inhibitory processes include actin severing
and capping proteins. The model assumes that fiber orientation affects the direction of actin growth. Carlsson used a
detailed 3D dendritic network model that does not require
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2012, 24:245–253

248 Cell regulation

Figure 2

S

(a)

(b)
signal

E

excitation

I

inhibition

RR

response
regulator

EN

(c)
θ

θ

Time
Time
first
peak
(d)
second peak

(e)

Time
Current Opinion in Cell Biology

The behavior of a LEGI–BEN when stimulated uniformly. (a) In the LEGI system, receptor-mediated signaling turns on excitation and inhibition
processes which act in a complementary manner on the response regulator (RR). (b) When receptor signaling is spatially uniform, the fast excitation
signal leads to a rapid increase in RR before the slower inhibitory signal turns it off, leading to adaptation. In the LEGI–BEN system, RR acts on the
excitable network (EN) by lowering the threshold. (c, d) Response of the EN shown as a kymograph around the perimeter of a cell (c) and showing the
total level of activity, integrated over the cell membrane (d). The spatially uniform increase in response regulator causes a large increase in the
probability of firing in the EN and this is seen as a first peak of activity. Following a refractory time, during which the RR is decreasing, the probability of
firing is higher than before the stimulus. Around the cell, this elicits localized patches of increased activity wherever the local stochastic perturbations
are higher than the threshold (arrows in c). Other points along the perimeter remain below the threshold. When integrated over the cell perimeter, the
total level of activity increases, leading to a second peak, but this is lower than the first as it represents firings over a smaller fraction of the cell
perimeter. (e) Observed effect in markers of activity (green) around the cell perimeter (e.g. PIP3) and cell shape at different times.

polarization of filament orientations to connect the
observed membrane-bound waves with the dynamics of
actin polymerization [23]. The autocatalytic step comes
from branching from existing filaments. In a related model,
Hecht et al. showed that patterns of high activity of finite
duration in both space and time arose because of random
stimulation of a FitzHugh–Nagumo model [24], and
suggested that these patches of high activity could correspond to the observed patterns of membrane localization of
signaling molecules such as PIP3 [19].
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2012, 24:245–253

Guidance of the excitable behavior
These models show that excitable systems driven by
random fluctuations can give rise to patterns observed
in spontaneously migrating cells, but do not address how
external chemoattractants can influence this behavior to
guide cells. Recently, we suggested a model that shows
how to steer this excitable behavior [18]. The key step is
to recall that excitable behavior is triggered by stochastic
perturbations that are sufficiently large to move the state
of the system across the threshold. Hence, there will be
www.sciencedirect.com

Biased excitable networks Iglesias and Devreotes 249

Figure 3

excitation (front)
(a)

inhibition
excitation (rear)
front
response
regulator

rear

rear

(b)

front

(c)
X

front

Y
(f)

Y level

level

Y-nullcline
Y-nullcline

front
threshold
threshold

(d)

perimeter

X-nullcline
Y-nullcline

(e)
Y-nullcline
Y-nullcline
rear

level

Y level

rear

threshold
X

X-nullcline
Y-nullcline

time

Y

X level

time
Current Opinion in Cell Biology

The behavior of a LEGI–BEN when in a chemoattractant gradient. (a) Cells in a gradient have increased receptor occupancy at the front of the cell
relative to the rear. (b) In the LEGI mechanism, the excitation signal rises to a level proportional to the local receptor signal. By contrast, the inhibition
signal is global, and so integrates the receptor signal around the cell and plateaus to an intermediate point. Hence, at the front of the cell excitation
exceeds inhibition and so the response regulator is above basal levels. (b, c) The RR lifts the nullcline which has the effect of lowering the threshold in
the EN thus increasing the frequency of firing at the front of the cell. The periodicity in the response comes from the refractory time needed for the
system to readjust after each firing. (d, e) At the rear, inhibition exceeds excitation and so the RR is below basal level. This lowers the nullcline, thus
raising the threshold which extinguishes the firing of the EN. (f) This kymograph shows how the patches of activity are localized to the front of the cell,
thus steering the motility of the cell toward the regions of high chemoattractant concentration.

more excitable behavior in regions where the threshold is
lower. If a chemoattractant lowered the threshold then
more excitable behavior would be seen in regions where
the cell experiences higher chemoattractant (Figure 3).
Such a system can be referred to as a biased excitable
network (BEN).

as 1%, and amplified biochemical responses have been
observed using biosensors [26,27]. Capturing these features has long been a goal of models of chemotaxis [2,3].
Simulations in which the activity of a BEN trigger pseudopod protrusions give rise to realistic cell morphologies
[28] (Shi et al., in preparation).

Because the occurrence of the spontaneous activity is tied
to the presence and size of a threshold, shallow chemoattractant gradients can give rise to steep differences in the
distribution of responses [18,25]. Chemotactic cells display extraordinary sensitivity, detecting gradients as small

Local-excitation, global-inhibition (LEGI)
models

www.sciencedirect.com

As powerful as a BEN is in explaining both the spontaneous activity of cells and the means for directing this
activity in response to gradients in receptor occupancy, it
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2012, 24:245–253

250 Cell regulation

fails to explain important properties of the chemoattractant-induced response. First, if increased receptor occupancy lowers the threshold for excitable behavior,
application of a spatially uniform dose of chemoattractant
would give rise to a persistent increase in the frequency of
the responses. By contrast, responses to uniform increments in chemoattractant are transient and so a means for
eventually reducing the frequency is required. Second, if
an external gradient is applied, receptor occupancy
increases both at the front and the back. Without a means
of subtracting the mean level of chemoattractant, a cell
relying on a BEN that was merely proportional to the
external gradient would increase the excitable behavior
everywhere. Gradients with higher midpoints exacerbate
this problem.
The original motivation of local-excitation, global-inhibition (LEGI) mechanisms was to account for these
important features of the response to chemoattractants
[29,30]. In LEGI models, temporal and spatial sensing
involves a balance between two opposing processes
(Figures 2 and 3). Receptor occupancy controls the
steady-state levels of a rapid, local excitation and a slower,
global inhibition which together control a response regulator. Upon chemoattractant addition, receptor occupancy increases, eliciting a fast rise in excitation. This
induces a response that peaks as excitation plateaus and
decreases as the slower rise in inhibition catches up. With
a uniform stimulus, the relative change in activity of
excitation and inhibition is the same and the level of
the response regulator returns to the pre-stimulus level
(Figure 2). By allowing the inhibitory molecule to integrate signaling from throughout the cell, and to act
globally, while at the same time requiring that excitation
be fixed at the membrane, this simple model also
accounts for gradient sensing in immobilized cells (Figure
3). However, it fails to capture important aspects of
chemotaxis. First, the original implementation of LEGI
did not significantly amplify the gradient, although several modifications have remedied this ([31], our unpublished results). Second, it did not capture the dynamic
behavior of chemotaxing cells.
We recently suggested a hybrid LEGI–BEN model in
which a LEGI mechanism is used to control the size of
the threshold level in an excitable network (Figure 2).
When a spatially uniform chemoattractant stimulus is
applied, the adaptive behavior of the LEGI mechanism
transiently lowers the threshold in the excitable network
for an extended period before slowly returning to its
prestimulus level. During this time, the probability of
triggering excitable behavior is higher than before the
stimulus and this is seen in the initial response and in the
increased presence of localized secondary flashes (Figure
2c,d). Once the LEGI system has adapted, the threshold
and, consequently, the frequency of excitable behavior
are restored to their prestimulus levels. In a gradient, the
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2012, 24:245–253

persistent elevation of the response regulator lowers the
threshold at the front of the cell increasing the local
frequency of activity in the direction of highest chemoattractant concentration (Figure 3). Equally important is
the fact that, at the rear, the response regulator is lower
than the basal level which raises the threshold thereby
inhibiting the appearance of excitable behavior.

Persistence and polarization
The LEGI–BEN model accounts for many of the
observed properties of chemotactic cells, including the
presence of excitable behavior in unstimulated cells, the
biphasic response to spatially uniform stimuli, and the
focusing of activity in response to gradients. However,
simulating cell movement in a gradient shows that two
aspects are still missing (Shi et al., in preparation). The
first is persistence: Well-differentiated Dictyostelium cells
migrating in the absence of stimulus move in a persistent
random walk [32,33], and this is a consequence of having
pseudopodia extend in the same direction [34]. The
second is polarization: Cells rearrange intracellular components to form leading and trailing edges with distinct
sensitivities to chemoattractants. Whereas unpolarized
cells respond immediately to changes in the direction
of a gradient by making a new front, strongly polarized
cells turn toward the new gradient while maintaining the
same leading edge [2,3,35].
In the context of the LEGI–BEN mechanism, it is easy to
envision how persistence and polarity are both consequences of a spatially perturbed threshold. First,
because we wish to explain persistence in the absence
of receptor occupancy, we assume that the localized firing
of the excitable network slowly increases the likelihood of
subsequent activity. Thus, we postulate a localized
positive feedback loop triggered by the excitable behavior (Y ! Z ! X in Figure 4). This contribution should
be parallel to, or in addition to, that of the LEGI mechanism. The addition of this loop also explains the spontaneous polarization seen in some cells, as well as the
maintenance of cell polarity after gradient removal. However, having only a positive feedback loop would eventually lead the whole cell toward an activated state. To
circumvent this problem, an inhibitory signal is needed
that can help to localize these signals. Thus, the proposed
mechanism also entails a secondary global inhibitory
signal acting as a feedback loop from the excitable system
(Y ! W ! X in Figure 4).
The suggestion that a second mechanism is required to
explain polarization is reminiscent of an early model of
Meinhardt in which a local activator that encompasses an
autocatalytic loop is coupled to two antagonistic processes
[36]. Recently, Neilson et al. incorporated Meinhardt’s
model into a physical model in which activator level
drives membrane protrusions and cell area is conserved,
and simulated chemotaxis [37]. These simulations show
www.sciencedirect.com

Biased excitable networks Iglesias and Devreotes 251

Figure 4

S

E

LEGI
I

(gradient
sensing &
adaptation)

RR

EN

X

(motility)

Z

W

Y
POL
(polarization/
persistence)
Current Opinion in Cell Biology

Modular view of chemotaxis consisting of a LEGI–BEN and incorporating
a putative polarization component. The system consists of three
interconnected components. The LEGI mechanism connects the system
to receptor occupancy. It adapts to spatially uniform stimuli and senses
chemoattractant gradients. The excitable network provides amplification
and regulates motility. In the absence of receptor signals, it results in
random motility, but can be steered by the external gradient through a
LEGI-mediated bias. The polarization (POL) component further biases its
activity based on the history of the EN firing. When these firings
represent random motility, this component provides persistence. When
the firings are the result of a gradient, this component leads to
polarization.

migrating cells whose tracks display persistence when
unstimulated, and turns in response to changes in external gradient. However, when stimulated by a uniform
stimulus, the response of these systems does not subside
and hence still requires a LEGI-type mechanism for
explaining adaptation. Moreover, by omitting the slow
positive feedback loop (Y ! Z ! X in Figure 4) these
models cannot explain the slow build up of polarity
observed in cells.

Molecular mechanisms
To date, our understanding of the molecular mechanisms giving rise to excitability is rather limited. Thus,
models proposed either eschew the assignment of molecular identities to the components of the excitable
network [18,24], provide exceedingly simple models
of the network [15], or focus on a small portion of the
network [22,23,25]. In fact, models cannot even agree
on whether actin forms part of the activator [22,23] or
inhibitor [15]!
Because of the complexity of the signaling mechanisms,
involving a number of parallel pathways in which many
www.sciencedirect.com

components display excitability, it is difficult to assign
components to the simple networks. A key component in
all models is the autocatalytic loop and there is wide
consensus that this involves actin polymerization in one
form or another. There is evidence such a positive feedback path exists which involves Ras, PI3K, and actin [38].
The strength of this loop could be amplified by the
presence of further feedbacks involving just the actin
cytoskeleton components. Another interesting possibility
entails the coupling of curved membrane proteins, like
BAR-domain proteins, with actin polymerization [39].
A possibly more fruitful approach at this time is to focus
on the loops of the excitable networks, to perturb these
computationally and to compare the predicted behavior
with the observed phenotypes of genetically and
pharmacologically altered cells. For example, disrupting
the negative feedback loop in the BEN enhances the
excitable behavior and interferes with the response to a
gradient [18]. This mimics the observed behavior of
cells lacking the PIP3 phosphatase, PTEN, which display many lateral pseudopods [40,41]. Similar behavior
is seen in cells lacking NF1, a GTPase activating
protein for RasG, as well as cells expressing the constitutively active RasCQ62L [42–45]. Thus, the negative feedback loop may act to curtail the activation of
the Ras proteins. The mechanical properties of the cell
may also contribute to the inhibitory loop. When simulating cell shape changes elicited by the LEGI–BEN,
we have noted that addition of a uniform stimulus gives
rise to a large spatially homogeneous increase in activity.
Rather than causing the cell to spread out everywhere as
force is applied throughout the cell perimeter, we
instead see a damping of protrusions because of the
mechanical model implemented ([46], Shi et al., in
preparation). Thus, global mechanical constraints can
serve as an inhibitory process.

Conclusion
The last couple of years have begun to shed light on a
connection between observed excitability of cytoskeletal events and directed cell migration and this is
providing fresh new insights into our understanding
of chemotaxis. We wish to highlight here how a hierarchical approach into this complex system has aided
this progress. A key early step was the conceptual
decoupling of the different processes that make up
chemotaxis: gradient sensing, random motility and
polarization. Rapid excitability can be associated with
motility. Gradient sensing and polarity can be treated as
systems that temporally and spatially alter the threshold
of the rapidly excitable system in different ways for
specific purposes. We have now reached the point where
these models can be integrated to understand the chemotactic behavior. Clearly, many questions remain,
including the identification of molecular components
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2012, 24:245–253

252 Cell regulation

and feedback loops. Nevertheless, these are truly exciting times in chemotaxis research.

Acknowledgements
We are thankful to members of both our labs, in particular Yuan Xiong and
Chuan-Hsiang (Bear) Huang for fruitful discussions and the Supplementary
Video. This work was supported partly by grants GM28007 and GM34933
from the National Institutes of Health.

Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can
be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ceb.20
11.11.009.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review,
have been highlighted as:
 of special interest
 of outstanding interest
1.

Roussos ET, Condeelis JS, Patsialou A: Chemotaxis in cancer.
Nat Rev Cancer 2011, 11:573-587.

2.

Iglesias PA, Devreotes PN: Navigating through models of
chemotaxis. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2008, 20:35-40.

3.


Jilkine A, Edelstein-Keshet L: A comparison of mathematical
models for polarization of single eukaryotic cells in response
to guided cues. PLoS Comput Biol 2011, 7:e1001121.
This review provides a comprehensive view of models that have been
proposed for explaining the response of cells to chemoattractant gradients.

and Arp2/3 assembly at the substrate-attached surface of
motile cells. Curr Biol 2004, 14:1-10.
15. Weiner OD, Marganski WA, Wu LF, Altschuler SJ, Kirschner MW:
An actin-based wave generator organizes cell motility. PLoS
Biol 2007, 5:e221.
16. Bretschneider T, Anderson K, Ecke M, Müller-Taubenberger A,
 Schroth-Diez B, Ishikawa-Ankerhold HC, Gerisch G: The threedimensional dynamics of actin waves, a model of cytoskeletal
self-organization. Biophys J 2009, 96:2888-2900.
This paper shows that excitability is present in cells lacking the Gbsubunit, and hence is independent of external chemoattractant signals.
This allows us to separate the excitable behavior from the gradient
sensing mechanism.
17. Gerisch G, Bretschneider T, Müller-Taubenberger A, Simmeth E,
Ecke M, Diez S, Anderson K: Mobile actin clusters and traveling
waves in cells recovering from actin depolymerization.
Biophys J 2004, 87:3493-3503.
18. Xiong Y, Huang CH, Iglesias PA, Devreotes PN: Cells navigate
 with a local-excitation, global-inhibition-biased excitable
network. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:17079-17086.
This paper introduces the concept of a biased excitable network (BEN)
and shows how it can be controlled by a local excitation, global inhibition
(LEGI) mechanism. It illustrates how differing time scales in the system
response are captured by various dynamics of the LEGI–BEN. Moreover,
by comparing responses of perturbed models to experimental data, it
suggests biochemical entities for the various loops in the LEGI–BEN.
19. Postma M, Roelofs J, Goedhart J, Loovers HM, Visser AJ, Van
Haastert PJ: Sensitization of Dictyostelium chemotaxis by
phosphoinositide-3-kinase-mediated self-organizing
signalling patches. J Cell Sci 2004, 117:2925-2935.
20. Asano Y, Nagasaki A, Uyeda TQ: Correlated waves of actin
filaments and PIP3 in Dictyostelium cells. Cell Motil
Cytoskeleton 2008, 65:923-934.

4.

Cai H, Devreotes PN: Moving in the right direction: how
eukaryotic cells migrate along chemical gradients. Sem Cell
Dev Biol 2011, in press. doi:10.1016/j.semcdb.2011.07.02.

21. Arai Y, Shibata T, Matsuoka S, Sato MJ, Yanagida T, Ueda M: Selforganization of the phosphatidylinositol lipids signaling
system for random cell migration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010,
107:12399-12404.

5.

Swaney KF, Huang CH, Devreotes PN: Eukaryotic chemotaxis: a
network of signaling pathways controls motility, directional
sensing, and polarity. Annu Rev Biophys 2010, 39:265-289.

22. Whitelam S, Bretschneider R, Burroughs NJ: Transformation
from spots to waves in a model of actin pattern formation.
Phys Rev Lett 2009, 102:198103.

6.

Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF: A quantitative description of membrane
current and its application to conduction and excitation in
nerve. J Physiol 1952, 117:500-544.

23. Carlsson AE: Dendritic actin filament nucleation causes
traveling waves and patches. Phys Rev Lett 2010, 104:228102.

7.

FitzHugh R: Impulses and physiological states in theoretical
models of nerve membrane. Biophys J 1960, 1:445-466.

8.

Nagumo J, Arimoto S, Yoshizawa S: An active pulse
transmission line simulating nerve axon. Proc IRE 1962,
50:2061-2070.

9.

Vicker MG, Xiang W, Plath PJ, Wosniok W: Pseudopodium
extension and amoeboid locomotion in Dictyostelium
discoideum: possible autowave behaviour of F-actin. Physica
D 1997, 101:317-332.

10. Vicker MG: Reaction-diffusion waves of actin filament
polymerization/depolymerization in Dictyostelium
pseudopodium extension and cell locomotion. Biophys Chem
2000, 84:87-98.
11. Vicker MG: Eukaryotic cell locomotion depends on the
propagation of self-organized reaction-diffusion waves and
oscillations of actin filament assembly. Exp Cell Res 2002,
275:54-66.
12. Vicker MG: F-actin assembly in Dictyostelium cell locomotion
and shape oscillations propagates as a self-organized
reaction-diffusion wave. FEBS Lett 2002, 510:5-9.
13. Bretschneider T, Jonkman J, Köhler J, Medalia O, Barisic K,
Weber I, Stelzer EH, Baumeister W, Gerisch G: Dynamic
organization of the actin system in the motile cells of
Dictyostelium. J Muscle Res Cell Motil 2002, 23:639-649.
14. Bretschneider T, Diez S, Anderson K, Heuser J, Clarke M, MüllerTaubenberger A, Köhler J, Gerisch G: Dynamic actin patterns
Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2012, 24:245–253

24. Hecht I, Kessler DA, Levine H: Transient localized patterns in
noise-driven reaction-diffusion systems. Phys Rev Lett 2010,

104:158301.
A model that ties the excitable behavior to the patches of high PIP3
activity observed in cells.
25. Naoki H, Sakumura Y, Ishii S: Stochastic control of spontaneous
signal generation for gradient sensing in chemotaxis. J Theor
Biol 2008, 255:259-266.
26. Janetopoulos C, Ma L, Devreotes PN, Iglesias PA:
Chemoattractant-induced phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5trisphosphate accumulation is spatially amplified and adapts,
independent of the actin cytoskeleton. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2004, 101:8951-8956.
27. Onsum MD, Wong K, Herzmark P, Bourne HR, Arkin AP:
Morphology matters in immune cell chemotaxis: membrane
asymmetry affects amplification. Phys Biol 2006, 25:190-199.
28. Hecht I, Skoge ML, Charest PG, Ben-Jacob E, Firtel RA,
 Loomis WF, Levine H, Rappel WJ: Activated membrane patches
guide chemotactic cell motility. PLoS Comput Biol 2011,
7:e1002044.
This paper integrates the patches of high activity with a model of cell
movement and obtains realistic trajectories and cell morphologies.
29. Parent CA, Devreotes PN: A cell’s sense of direction. Science
1999, 284:765-770.
30. Levchenko A, Iglesias PA: Models of eukaryotic gradient
sensing: application to chemotaxis of amoebae and
neutrophils. Biophys J 2002, 82:50-63.
www.sciencedirect.com

Biased excitable networks Iglesias and Devreotes 253

31. Levine H, Kessler DA, Rappel WJ: Directional sensing in
eukaryotic chemotaxis: a balanced inactivation model. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:9761-9766.

This paper suggests that mechanical, rather than biochemical properties
of proteins may be involved in closing the autocatalytic loop of an
excitable system that gives rise to propagating waves.

32. Bödeker HU, Beta C, Frank TD, Bodenschatz E: Quantitative
analysis of random amoeboid motion. Eurphys Lett 2010,
90:28005.

40. Iijima M, Devreotes P: Tumor suppressor PTEN mediates
sensing of chemoattractant signaling. Cell 2002,
109:599-610.

33. Liang L, Cox EC, Flyvbjerg HF: ‘Dicty dynamics’: Dictyostelium
motility as persistent random motion. Phys Biol 2011, 8:046006.

41. Wessels D, Lusche DF, Kuhl S, Heid P, Soll DR: PTEN plays a role
in the suppression of lateral pseudopod formation during
Dictyostelium motility and chemotaxis. J Cell Sci 2007,
120:2517-2531.

34. Bosgraaf L, Van Haastert PJM: The ordered extension of
pseudopodia by amoeboid cells in the absence of external
cues. PLoS ONE 2009:4e5253.
35. Onsum MD, Rao CV: Calling heads from tails: the role of
mathematical modeling in understanding cell polarization.
Curr Opin Cell Biol 2009, 21:74-81.

42. Kamimura Y, Xiong Y, Iglesias PA, Hoeller O, Bolourani P,
Devreotes PN: PIP3-independent activation of TorC2 and PKB
at the cell’s leading edge mediates chemotaxis. Curr Biol 2008,
18:1034-1043.

36. Meinhardt H: Orientation of chemotactic cells and growth cones:
models and mechanisms. J Cell Sci 1999, 112:2867-2874.

43. Zhang S, Charest PG, Firtel RA: Spatiotemporal regulation of
Ras activity provides directional sensing. Curr Biol 2008,
18:1587-1593.

37. Neilson MP, Veltman DM, van Haastert PJM, Webb SD,
Mackenzie JA, Insall RH: Chemotaxis: a feedback-based
computational model robustly predicts multiple aspects of
real cell behaviour. PLoS Biol 2011, 9:e1000618.

44. Cai H, Das S, Kamimura Y, Long Y, Parent CA, Devreotes PN: Rasmediated activation of the TORC2-PKB pathway is critical for
chemotaxis. J Cell Biol 2010, 190:233-245.

38. Sasaki AT, Janetopoulos C, Lee S, Charest PG, Takeda K,
Sundheimer LW, Meili R, Devreotes PN, Firtel RA: G proteinindependent Ras/PI3K/F-actin circuit regulates basic cell
motility. J Cell Biol 2007, 16:185-191.
39. Peleg B, Disanza A, Scita G, Gov N: Propagating cell-membrane

waves driven by curved activators of actin polymerization.
PLoS ONE 2011, 6:e18635.

www.sciencedirect.com

45. Liu L, Das S, Losert W, Parent CA: mTORC2 regulates
neutrophils chemotaxis in a cAMP- and RhoA-dependent
fashion. Dev Cell 2010, 19:845-857.
46. Yang L, Effler JC, Kutscher BL, Sullivan SE, Robinson DN,
Iglesias PA: Modeling cellular deformations using the level set
formalism. BMC Syst Biol 2008, 2:68.

Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2012, 24:245–253

