Cell, Vol. 109, 599–610, May 31, 2002, Copyright 2002 by Cell Press

Tumor Suppressor PTEN Mediates
Sensing of Chemoattractant Gradients
Miho Iijima and Peter Devreotes1
Department of Cell Biology
Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine
Baltimore, Maryland 21205

Summary
Shallow gradients of chemoattractants, sensed by G
protein-linked signaling pathways, elicit localized
binding of PH domains specific for PI(3,4,5)P3 at sites
on the membrane where rearrangements of the cytoskeleton and pseudopod extension occur. Disruption of the PI 3-phosphatase, PTEN, in Dictyostelium
discoideum dramatically prolonged and broadened
the PH domain relocation and actin polymerization
responses, causing the cells lacking PTEN to follow a
circuitous route toward the attractant. Exogenously
expressed PTEN-GFP localized to the surface membrane at the rear of the cell. Membrane localization
required a putative PI(4,5)P2 binding motif and was
required for chemotaxis. These results suggest that
specific phosphoinositides direct actin polymerization
to the cell’s leading edge and regulation of PTEN
through a feedback loop plays a critical role in gradient
sensing and directional migration.
Introduction
Many cells have a biochemical compass that allows
them to sense the direction of extracellular stimuli and
guides their movements along chemoattractant gradients (Parent and Devreotes, 1999; Rickert et al., 2000).
This process, called chemotaxis, plays a role in normal
physiological events such as lymphocyte homing, angiogenesis, embryogenesis, and wound healing and in
diseases such as asthma, multiple sclerosis, arthritis,
and cancer (Wardlaw et al., 2000; Baggiolini, 2001). In
many instances, the chemoattractants are detected by
G protein-coupled receptors, which control numerous
cellular processes including cell polarization—chemotactic cells are typically elongated and more sensitive to
attractant at one end—and directional sensing, relatively
unpolarized cells are able to detect shallow external
gradients. A current challenge is to elucidate the signal
transduction events that mediate cell polarization and
directional sensing, which together comprise the cell’s
compass.
Studies in Dictyostelium discoideum and in mammalian leukocytes have shown that chemoattractant receptors and G protein subunits remain distributed uniformly
on the perimeter of a chemotaxing cell and therefore,
the signaling pathways must be selectively activated on
the cell’s leading edge (Xiao et al., 1997; Servant et al.,
1999). In an experiment that first visualized localized
activation, the PH domain of cytosolic regulator of ade1

Correspondence: pnd@jhmi.edu

nylyl cyclase (Crac) was shown to selectively translocate
to the membrane at the front of a chemotaxing D. discoideum cell (Parent et al., 1998; Jin et al., 2000). It is
likely that Crac is recruited to the membrane by binding to specific phosphoinositides (Y.E. Huang and P.D.,
unpublished data). Other PH domains with the same
phosphoinositide binding specificity as Crac have subsequently been shown to respond similarly to chemoattractants in D. discoideum and leukocytes (Meili et al.,
1999; Haugh et al., 2000; Servant et al., 2000). The profile
of PH domains which report the directional response
most effectively suggests changes occur in the local
concentrations of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5 trisphosphate (PI(3,4,5)P3) and phosphatidylinositol 3,4 bisphosphate (PI(3,4)P2). These observations led to the proposal
that the determination of the directional response occurs within the signaling pathway and that the activity
of the cytoskeleton is locally controlled by these phosphoinositides (Parent et al., 1998).
Exposure of cells to a uniform increment in chemoattractant results in transient increases in phosphoinositides, polymerized actin, cAMP, cGMP, IP3, and Ca⫹2
influx, phosphorylation of myosins as well as rapid
changes in cell shape (van Es and Devreotes, 1999).
Evidence suggests that the G protein ␤␥ complex propagates the signal to these responses, although the identities of its direct and relevant effectors are unknown. It
is possible that the G protein couples to only a few
effector enzymes and that an increase in a single messenger regulates multiple downstream responses. In
fact, many responses display similar kinetics and several are known to occur at the leading edge of the cell,
suggesting a level of coordination. We have proposed
that specific phosphoinositides act as a “node” in the
chemoattractant signaling pathway and that downstream components bearing PH domains and involved
in pseudopodia extension are directed to the site on the
membrane marked by highest concentration of these
lipids (Parent et al., 1998).
Thus far, a causal relationship between the elicited
appearance of specific phosphoinositides, actin polymerization, other physiological responses, and directional pseudopod extension has not been established.
Evidence suggesting a role of phosphatidylinositol
3-kinases (PI3K) in directed migration has been confusing. D. discoideum cells lacking multiple PI3Ks have
alternately been described as displaying either faster or
impaired chemotaxis (Buczynski et al., 1997; Funamoto
et al., 2001). Neutrophils from mice lacking PI3K␥ show
defective chemotaxis, while lymphocytes do not show
strong defects (Hirsch et al., 2000; Li et al., 2000; Sasaki
et al., 2000). Similarly, inconsistent results have been
obtained with the PI3K inhibitors, LY294002 and wortmannin, which have been reported to either inhibit or
have little effect on chemotaxis (Wu et al., 2000a; Wymann et al., 2000). Furthermore, actin polymerization,
the salient response underlying pseudopod extension,
is unaffected by mutations or inhibitors of PI3K. Disruption of the PI 3-phophatase, PTEN, and the PI 5-phosphatase, SHIP, in mice, D. melanogaster, and C. elegans

Cell
600

Figure 1. PTEN Ortholog and Disruption
(A) A Blasticidin resistance marker (BSR) was
inserted into the Hinc II site of the PTEN gene
by homologous recombination as shown. The
gray box represents the active site of the
phosphatase domain. In the PCR analysis,
lanes 1–3 show bands from primer pair 1:3 on
genomic DNA from wild-type and two pten⫺
clones. Lanes 4–6 show bands from primer
pair 2:3 on same genomic DNA preparations.
Primers 1 and 3 are in the PTEN sequence;
primer 2 is in BSR sequence. The sequences
of primers 1, 2, and 3 are 5⬘-GCAATGGGATT
TCCAAGTGAAAAGTTG-3⬘, 5⬘-GCATTGTAAT
CTTCTCTGTCGCTAC-3⬘ and 5⬘-GAGCTATT
TGAAGAAGTTTCACTGTC-3⬘. Marker lanes
show the 1 Kb DNA ladder (GIBCO).
(B) Phenotypes of wild-type, pten⫺, and
PTEN-GFP/pten⫺ cells as clonal plaques on
bacterial lawns and on nonnutrient agar. Cells
within wild-type plaques (top) differentiate
and aggregate to form multicellular fruiting
bodies. The pten⫺ cells (middle) form smaller
plaques and the cells fail to aggregate. Expression of PTEN-GFP in the pten⫺ cells
nearly restores the wild-type phenotype. Calibration bar indicates 3 mm. Supplemental
Video S1B, available at http://www.cell.com/
cgi/content/full/109/5/599/DC1, of pten⫺, and
PTEN-GFP/pten⫺ cells aggregating on nonnutrient agar were recorded by phase contrast microscopy at 100-fold magnification.
Time-lapse ratio was 240-fold.

has been reported to cause dramatic pleiotropic phenotypes, including reports of enhanced cytoskeletal activity (Ogg and Ruvkun, 1998; Stambolic et al., 1998; Goberdhan et al., 1999; Kim et al., 1999). However, effects
on motility and chemotaxis have not been assessed. The
roles of PTEN in cell polarization, directional sensing, or
actin polymerization remain to be defined. We reasoned
that investigation of PTEN in a biochemically and microscopically accessible cell, such as D. discoideum, would
clearly elucidate the link between these lipids, the physiological responses triggered by chemoattractants, and
directional sensing.
Results
Isolation and Disruption of an Ortholog of the PI
3-Phosphatase and Tumor Suppressor PTEN
To interfere with the regulation of PI(3,4,5)P3 and
PI(3,4)P2, we sought and disrupted by homologous recombination a putative PI 3-phosphatase in D. discoideum. A genomic search revealed seven sequences
with protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) motifs, but only
one gene stood out as a bona fide ortholog of the human
PTEN tumor suppressor gene. As illustrated in Figure
1A, the N-terminal half of the PTEN gene containing

the phosphatase domain is 56% identical to the human
gene. The C-terminal regions containing the C2, PEST,
and PDZ domains in the mammalian enzyme are 13%
to 37% identical (Maehama et al., 2001). We inserted a
blasticidin resistance marker into the open reading
frame, transformed cells, and screened for homologous
recombination events by PCR and Southern analysis.
Several positive clones were found in a search of over
1200 drug-resistant colonies from six independent
transformations. As shown in Figure 1A, specific primer
sets showed bands of the expected size in pten⫺ and
wild-type clones. Southern blots showed that several
copies of the plasmid had inserted into a single site
within the PTEN locus (data not shown). The extremely
low efficiency of gene disruption is attributed to the slow
growth rate of the disruptants. In axenic HL-5 medium,
the pten⫺ cells have a doubling time of 25 hr versus 11
hr for the wild-type. The origin of the slower growth rate
is under investigation. All of the phenotypes of the pten⫺
cells including the growth defect were reversed by expression of the full-length PTEN cDNA from a constitutively active promoter. The PTEN/pten⫺ as well as wildtype cells were used as controls in subsequent characterization of the pten⫺ cells.
The wild-type, pten⫺, and PTEN/pten⫺ cells display

PI 3-Phosphatase and Chemotaxis
601

Figure 2. Expression of cAMP Receptor
cAR1 and Chemotactic Responses
(A) Immunoblot of the major cAMP receptor
cAR1 in wild-type and pten⫺ cells differentiated for 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 hr.
(B) The response of wild-type, pten⫺, and
PTEN-GFP/pten⫺ cells to 10⫺6 or 10⫺8 M
cAMP was examined using the small-drop
assay. After 30 or 60 min, over 200 drops were
judged and the percentage positive drops
were scored.
(C–F) Chemotaxis to a micropitette filled with
1 ␮M cAMP. The movement of wild-type,
pten⫺ (E and F), or PTEN-GFP/pten⫺ (C and
D) cells was recorded. The photographs of 0
(C and E) and 20 (D and F) min are shown.
Calibration bar indicates 0.4 mm.

dramatically different developmental phenotypes. When
starved, D. discoideum cells spontaneously aggregate
and differentiate to form beautifully patterned multicellular structures. Aggregation is brought about by propagated waves of cAMP, which emanate from centers at
6 min intervals and coordinate periodic steps of chemotactic cell motion. The pten⫺ cells failed to aggregate
under a variety of conditions suggesting a strong defect
in chemotaxis or cell-cell signaling (Figure 1B). On bacterial lawns, individual cells formed small plaques, suggesting an additional defect in growth or phagocytosis
(Figure 1B). Time-lapse video analysis of the pten⫺ cells
plated on nonnutrient agar showed that cell-cell signaling starts normally within a few hours of the onset of
development (Figure 1B and Supplemental Video S1B,
available at http://www.cell.com/cgi/content/full/109/5/
599/DC1). Consistently the major chemoattractant receptor, cAR1, appeared at the 5 to 6 hr stage at the
same level in both wild-type and pten⫺ cells (Figure 2A).
However, the typically rhythmic waves of cell motion
reflecting cell-cell signaling were unstable. New centers
appeared throughout the field as existing centers failed
to persist, suggesting that the oscillations in cAMP production are unsustainable (see Videos 1B). Moreover,
while the cells did react to the cAMP waves by changing
shape, their chemotactic steps toward the center were
much less significant than those of wild-type cells. The
pten⫺cells eventually formed a few tiny deformed multi-

cellular structures. Thus, in spite of clear evidence of
appropriate differentiation and onset of cell-cell signaling, aggregation does not occur normally. The PTEN/
pten⫺ cells displayed large aggregation positive plaques
on bacterial lawns and formed normal fruiting bodies
on nonnutrient agar, indicating that the defects in the
pten⫺ cells are specifically due to the absence of PTEN
(Figure 1B).
The failure of the pten⫺ cells to aggregate can be
traced to multiple interesting deficiencies. Chemotaxis
is very defective as determined in standard small drop
and micropipette assays. In the small drop assay, spots
of a few hundred cells are placed near spots of cAMP
on an agar surface (Figure 2B). Wild-type cells typically
show directed movement toward the chemoattractant
at concentrations ranging from 10 nM to 10 ␮M. The
pten⫺ cells responded more slowly and less vigorously
than wild-type cells. Whereas all of the spots of wildtype cells scored as positive within 15 to 30 min, only
a fraction of the spots of the pten⫺ cells scored positive
at 30 min. In steeper gradients after 60 to 90 min, pten⫺
cells did score positively. In the micropippette assay, a
needle releasing chemoattractant is placed in a field of
cells and establishes a 10% gradient along the length
of a typical cell. Within 20 min, wild-type (not shown) or
PTEN/pten⫺ cells gather at the tip. The pten⫺ cells display only a barely detectable accumulation under the
same conditions (Figures 2C–2F). The pten⫺ cells dis-

Cell
602

play numerous long filopodia and extend pseudopodia
more rapidly and erratically than the wild-type cells,
possibly accounting for the slower rate of accumulation
toward chemoattractant (see below). The PTEN/pten⫺
cells regained the normal morphological appearance as
well as the rapid chemotactic responses of the wildtype cells.
Chemoattractant-Elicited Changes in PH
Domains, Actin Polymerization, and Cyclic
Nucleotides in Pten⫺ Cells
We expressed the PH domain of Crac fused to green
fluorescent protein (PHCrac-GFP) in pten⫺ cells and monitored chemoattractant-induced production of PH domain binding sites on the plasma membrane by subcellular fractionation and fluorescence microscopy (Figure
3 and Supplemental Videos S3B, top and bottom, available at http://www.cell.com/cgi/content/full/109/5/599/
DC1). When an incremental stimulus was applied to wildtype cells, the fusion protein rapidly translocated to the
membrane and returned to the cytosol within 20 to 60
s. In pten⫺ cells, the translocation of PHCrac-GFP to the
membrane was dramatically exaggerated and prolonged. The maximal levels associated with the membrane were slightly higher; and after 180 s, significant
amounts still remained associated with the membrane.
Eventually after 6 to 8 min, the response subsided (data
not shown). Moreover, significantly lower doses of chemoattractant were required to elicit an equivalent response in the pten⫺ versus wild-type cells. Whereas 1
nM was needed for a clear response in wild-type cells,
a similar response in the pten⫺ cells was observed with
10 pM cAMP (data not shown). This concentration is
calculated to occupy about twenty receptors per cell,
suggesting that there is significant amplification of the
response, which is normally regulated down by PTEN
in wild-type cells. We also compared the PH domain
translocation responses induced by added cAMP to
those elicited by folic acid, a chemoattractant active on
growth stage cells, which acts through different receptors and heterotrimeric G proteins. Uniform increases
in folic acid elicited prolonged responses in the pten⫺
versus wild-type cells; however, the differences were
less pronounced (not shown).
The features of chemoattractant-induced actin polymerization in wild-type versus pten⫺ cells differ dramatically (Figure 4). In wild-type cells, stimulation typically
triggers a biphasic response. An initial large peak occurs
at 6 s; it is followed by a rapid decrease and a subsequent broad low peak centered at 2 min. In the pten⫺
cells, the basal level of polymerized actin typically was
about 30% higher than that in wild-type cells. This elevated level may underlie the increased frequency of
spontaneous protrusions observed in unstimulated
cells. Stimulation with cAMP triggered larger and apparently longer increases in actin polymerization in the
pten⫺ versus wild-type cells. The differences were most
evident in the second peak, which was significantly exaggerated (Figure 4A). In four independent experiments,
the F actin levels at 1 and 2 min were typically 6-fold
higher in the pten⫺ versus wild-type cells. Whereas the
response in wild-type cells was barely detectable at 3
min, the response of the pten⫺ cells remained elevated

even after 5 min of stimulation. During stimulation, the
pten⫺ cells periodically extended numerous actin-rich
projections, including filopods and elongated pseudopodia (see Figure 3). We compared the PH-GFP relocation and actin polymerization responses by fluorescence
microscopy at 30 s when the wild-type responses had
nearly subsided. As shown in Figure 4C, in the pten⫺
cells the regions on the membrane where the PH-GFP
signal persisted coincided with those of higher F actin
accumulation. Eventually after about 10 min of continuous stimulation, the response of the pten⫺ cells appeared to subside. A normal actin polymerization response similar to that in wild-type cells was restored in
the PTEN/pten⫺ cells (Figure 4A).
We next monitored the cAMP-induced increases in
cyclic nucleotides cAMP and cGMP in the pten⫺ versus
wild-type cells. In wild-type cells, a transient increase
in adenylyl cyclase can be monitored in lysates prepared
from cells sampled before and after stimulation. The
response underlies the oscillatory production of cAMP
and propagated waves of cAMP, which coordinate chemotactic movements of cells during aggregation. As
shown in Figure 5, the elicited level of activation of adenylyl cyclase 1 min after stimulus addition was 2- to
4-fold higher in the pten⫺ versus wild-type cells in five
independent experiments. The time-course of the adenylyl cyclase response, however, was not significantly
prolonged in the pten⫺ cells. Expression of PTEN in
the pten⫺ cells restored the smaller response typically
observed in wild-type cells. In wild-type cells, the chemoattractants folic acid and cAMP each trigger rapid
accumulations of cGMP which peak within 10 s and
return toward baseline levels by 30 to 60 s (Figure 5).
The cGMP accumulation responses elicited by cAMP
were not significantly different in the pten⫺ versus wildtype cells.
Altered Levels of Phosphosinositides Lead
to Chemotaxis Defects
We examined the chemotactic defects in finer detail by
observing the responses of wild-type and pten⫺ cells
to gradients supplied by chemoattractant-filled micropipettes. As shown in Figure 6 and corresponding videos,
the wild-type cells maintained a persistently focused
leading edge that facilitated their movement directly toward the source of the chemoattractant. In contrast, the
pten⫺ cells displayed a broad irregular front, often the
pten⫺ cells extended three or more pseudopodia pointing generally but not directly up the gradient. Occasionally, pseudopodia appeared at the rear of the cell and
the cell moved backward. Thus, compared to wild-type
cells, the pten⫺ cells followed a more circuitous path
toward the source of the attractant (Figure 6). The mean
speed and chemotactic indices of the pten⫺ cells were
3.0 ⫾ 1.3 ␮m/min and 0.79 ⫾ 0.46, respectively. These
values for the wild-type cells were 11.4 ⫾ 3.6 ␮m/min
and 0.99 ⫾ 0.01. This behavior explains the weaker chemotactic responses observed in the small drop and micropipette assays described earlier.
To understand this defective chemotactic response,
we examined the distribution of the PH domains in the
pten⫺ versus wild-type cells. We expressed PHCrac-GFP
in wild-type and pten⫺ cells and observed the distribu-

PI 3-Phosphatase and Chemotaxis
603

Figure 3. PHCrac-GFP Translocation in Wild-Type and pten⫺ Cells
(A) Suspensions of wild-type or pten⫺ cells expressing PHCrac-GFP were stimulated with 1 ␮M cAMP. At each of the indicated time points
(seconds), aliquots of cells were lysed into buffer and membranes were collected by microcentrifugation. The bound PHCrac-GFP was analyzed
by immunoblot detection of GFP. The relative amounts of the PHCrac-GFP associated with membrane fraction were quantified using NIH Image
software. Blue bars are wild-type cells; red bars are pten⫺ cells.
(B) Confocal images captured at the indicated times (seconds) following addition of 100 nM cAMP. Top, response in wild-type cells returns
completely to baseline within 25 s. Bottom, response in pten⫺ cells declines with a half time of several minutes. Supplemental Videos S3B
top and bottom available at http://www.cell.com/cgi/content/full/109/5/599/DC1 show a complete sequence from which timed images were
taken. Single white frame in video indicates the addition of a stimulus increment. Images were captured at 3 s intervals and played back at
0.2 s intervals.
(C) Quantitative analysis of the PHCrac-GFP translocation. Fluorescence intensity was measured by scanning a line through a cell with IPLab
software. The change of fluorescence distribution was calculated by subtracting the intensity along the line before stimulation from the
intensity along the same line at the indicated times. To reveal the kinetics of the PHCrac-GFP translocation after cAMP stimulation, for each
time point the sum of the increase at the membrane and the decrease in the cytosol were determined, and all the data were normalized to
the maximal level observed in the pten⫺ cells (right). This normalized sum was designated “Relocalization Index.” Average data from 12 wildtype (blue) or pten⫺ (red) cells in separate experiments are shown.

tions in cells exposed to gradients supplied by a micropipette. As shown in Figures 6C and 6D and Supplementary Videos S6C and S6D, the multiple misdirected
pseudopods extended by the chemotaxing pten⫺ cells
are simultaneously labeled with PHCrac-GFP. At any mo-

ment, an extensively broader region along the leading
edge of the cell is associated with the PHCrac-GFP. In
still images of wild-type cells, an average of 9.5% ⫾ 2%
of the perimeter was covered by PHCrac-GFP, while in
pten⫺ cells 47% ⫾ 8% of the perimeter was occupied.

Cell
604

Figure 4. Prolonged and Exaggerated Actin
Polymerization in pten⫺ Cells
(A) The t ⫽ 0 sample was taken before addition of a 1 ␮M cAMP stimulus. Values are
normalized to the amount of F actin in wildtype cells at t ⫽ 0. This typically corresponds
to about 30% of the total actin pool. There
was no difference in the total actin levels in
the wild-type versus pten⫺ cells. The data
shown are means of at least four independent
experiments. Blue bars are wild-type cells;
red bars are pten⫺ cells.
(B and C) Wild-type (B) and pten⫺ (C) cells
were stimulated with 1 ␮M cAMP. After 30 s,
cells were fixed with 2% parafomaldehyde/
0.1% triton and stained with TRITC-Phalloidin. Two typical cells are shown for each cell
type. Green is PH-GFP, red is RITC-phalloidin, and the merged image is shown at right.

In addition, many of the pten⫺ cells displayed a region
of PHCrac-GFP at the rear of the cell. This region occasionally expanded and the cell then extended a pseudopod
toward the back (Figure 6D).
We next examined the distribution of PTEN-GFP in
living cells during chemotactic stimulation. PTEN-GFP
was functional since, as described above, it rescued all
of the phenotypes of the pten⫺ cells. In resting cells,
about 4% of the fluorescent signal was associated with
the perimeter of the cell while the remainder was distributed uniformly in the cytosol (Figure 7). When a uniform
increase in extracellular cAMP was applied to the cells,
94% of the bound PTEN-GFP rapidly dissociated from
the membrane. Within 1 min of continuous stimulation,
the protein returned to the membrane. Often the level

of membrane association in the adapted cells reached
10% and thus exceeded that of the unstimulated cells
(Figure 7A). When cells were exposed to a gradient from a
cAMP-filled micropipette, the PTEN-GFP dissociated from
the leading edge and accumulated at the rear of the cell
(Figure 7B and Supplemental Video S7, available at http://
www.cell.com/cgi/content/full/109/5/599/DC1)
To investigate the mechanism of association of PTEN
with the membrane, we deleted the putative PI(4,5)P2
binding domain, located in the N-terminal of the protein.
Removal of the 16 amino acids, containing this site,
resulted in a PTEN-GFP protein that no longer associated with the membrane. Instead, all of the protein was
localized uniformly in the cytosol with a distribution essentially identical to that of GFP (Figure 7C). Subcellular

PI 3-Phosphatase and Chemotaxis
605

Figure 5. Chemoattractant-Elicited Changes in Cyclic Nucleotides
(A) Adenylyl cyclase activity was determined from lysates prepared
before and after 1 ␮M cAMP stimulation. Experiment was repeated
five times with similar fold increases for wild-type and pten⫺ cells
and the averages of normalized activities are shown. For each experiment, activities were normalized to the prestimulus value of the
wild-type cells. The peak activity in wild-type was typically 10–20
pmoles/min/mg.
(B) cGMP levels in cells prepared during 1 ␮M cAMP stimulation.
Experiment was repeated at least three times with similar results,
and the averages of cGMP levels are shown.

fractionation and immunoblot analyses also indicated
that the amount of PTEN-GFP associated with the membrane was reduced (data not shown). Interestingly, the
cytosolic version of PTEN-GFP was unable to rescue
the pten⫺ cells, suggesting that membrane localization
is required for the function of PTEN in chemotaxis (data
not shown).
Discussion
We have previously proposed that detection of the external gradient and localization of the response to the

front of the cell first occurs within the signal transduction
pathway (Parent et al., 1998). The restricted response
is visualized with GFP-tagged PH domains which specifically detect PI(3,4,5)P3 or PI(3,4)P2 in living cells. We
further suggested that physiological responses such as
actin polymerization, which bring about pseudopod extension, are directed to sites on the inner face of the
membrane with the highest concentration of these phosphoinositides. The observations of the pten⫺ cells confirm and extend these proposals and establish a working
model for directional sensing. This advance allows future studies to focus on two key questions: First, how
does phosphoinositide production become limited to
the front edge of the cell? Second, what are the steps
linking the increased phosphoinositides to pseudopod
extension?
We have outlined a local excitation and global inhibition model for localizing the response to an external
gradient (Parent and Devreotes, 1999). This model has
been extended and quantitatively analyzed (Levchenko
and Iglesias, 2002). Briefly, a balance between the rapid
excitatory and the slower inhibitory processes, which
are each controlled by receptor occupancy, regulates
the response. When receptor occupancy is changed
and then held constant, excitation rapidly increases and
a response ensues until inhibition eventually attains the
same level. In a spatial gradient, the steady-state level
of excitation at the front of the cell exceeds the level of
global inhibition and there is a persistent response. At
the back, excitation is less than inhibition so there is no
response. According to this model, the duration of a
response to a stimulus increment is related to its spatial
localization in a gradient. Responses of brief duration
are tightly localized, while those that do not subside
cannot be sharply confined. The observations on the
pten⫺ cells are consistent with this aspect of the model.
In the pten⫺ cells, there is an increase in the duration
of the response to a stimulus increment and a corresponding broadening of the localization of the phosphoinositides in a gradient. Recent observations of G protein
signaling in living cells using fluorescence resonance
energy transfer (FRET) have shown that the G protein
subunits remain disassociated as long as receptors are
occupied and thus the activated G protein is not expected to be localized (Janetopoulos et al., 2001). This
suggests that there is a receptor-mediated inhibitory
process that acts downstream of the G protein cycle
to terminate the physiological responses and offset G
protein activation at the back of the cell.
The observations of pten⫺ cells demonstrate that
there is a causal link between PI(3,4,5)P3 and PI(3,4)P2
regulation, actin polymerization, and chemotactic response. Whereas previous studies have illustrated a
temporal and spatial correlation between these lipids
and the physiological responses underlying pseudopodia formation, the results reported here show a direct,
ordered relationship. In response to stimulus increments, the magnitude and time course of phosphoinositide production are increased in cells lacking PTEN, and
this leads to parallel alterations in actin polymerization.
In gradients, the normal localization of PHCrac-GFP is
dramatically broadened, and the region from which F
actin-filled pseudopodia are extended is correspondingly increased. All of these observations suggest that

Cell
606

Figure 6. Chemotactic Responses of Wild-Type and pten⫺ Cells
Outlines of cells moving toward micropipette filled with 1 ␮M cAMP were prepared at 1 min intervals and overlaid as different colors. The
movements were calculated by tracing the movement of individual cell in videos. Speed is the distance between successive cell centers
divided by the time-lapse interval. Chemotactic index is the cosine of the angle between the line from the centroid of the cell to the needle
and a line through the direction of cell movement. The images of PH domain localization in chemotactically moving cells are taken with a
confocal microscope. The asterisk or the dot indicates the position of the micropipette. (A) and (C) are wild-type cells; (B) and (D) are pten⫺
cells. Calibration bar indicates 15 ␮m. Supplemental Videos S6C and S6D, available at http://www.cell.com/cgi/content/full/109/5/599/DC1,
show the complete sequence from which the images were taken. Frames were captured at 3 s intervals and played back at 0.2 s intervals.

the inability to restrict the activity of the cytoskeletal
events to the leading edge of the cell underlies the observed chemotactic defects in the pten⫺ cells.
Additional responses dependent on phosphoinositides and PH domain containing proteins are probably
altered in the pten⫺ cells. For instance, the magnitude of
the adenylyl cyclase response is greater. This increase
is anticipated since activation of the adenylyl cyclases
depends on Crac and significantly more Crac is recruited
to the membrane in the pten⫺ cells (Lilly and Devreotes,
1995). The increased adenylyl cyclase activation response in the pten⫺ cells most likely leads to increased
cAMP accumulation and interference with normal cellcell communication. Careful inspection of the supplemental videos, available at http://www.cell.com/cgi/content/
full/109/5/599/DC1, suggests a deficiency in the cAMP
oscillators at the centers of aggregates. The oscillator
involves positive feedback, reversible adaptation, and
signal degradation (Devreotes et al., 1983; Parent and
Devreotes, 1996). Mathematical simulations have shown
that oscillations are permitted when each of these activities resides within a fixed range. We surmise that the

exaggerated adenylyl cyclase activity perturbs the system so that continuous oscillations cannot be sustained.
In the video, one or a few waves are typically fired before
the center falls silent. However, these aberrant oscillations would not have affected our chemotaxis measurements. We monitored chemotactic behavior to externally applied gradients in the presence and absence of
inhibitors of adenylyl cyclase activation and observed
similar defects. We expect that protein kinase B is also
more strongly activated in the pten⫺ cells since its activation is controlled by recruitment to the membrane by
PI(3,4,5)P3 and PI(3,4)P2 (Meili et al., 1999). It would be
interesting to investigate the contribution of this increased activation to the phenotype.
Attempts to interfere with the PI3K activity have not
provided unambiguous support for the hypothesis that
phosphoinositides are a key intermediate in chemotaxis.
In D. discoideum, neither pi3k1⫺/pi3k2⫺ cells nor cells
treated with reasonable concentrations of PI3K inhibitors display strong defects in chemoattractant-induced
actin polymerization even though increases in phosphoinositides are significantly reduced (Zhou et al., 1998).

PI 3-Phosphatase and Chemotaxis
607

Figure 7. Subcellular
Localization
PTEN-GFP in pten⫺ Cells

of

(A) Pten⫺ cells expressing PTEN-GFP were
uniformly stimulated by 1 ␮M cAMP. Before
stimulation, a detectable amount of
PTEN-GFP is localized on the plasma membrane. This percentage is based on the fluorescent signal located at the cell perimeter.
The actual percentage on the membrane
would be calculated to be higher depending
on the cell shape. Cells were stimulated with
cAMP and images were captured at 5 s intervals.
(B) PTEN-GFP was accumulated in the rear
of the PTEN/pten⫺ cells chemotaxing toward
a 1 ␮M cAMP filled micropipette. In this series, the micropipette was repositioned three
times as indicated by the white diamonds. In
upper left, the image was captured 80 s after
placing the pipette. In upper right and lower
left, images were captured at 125 s and 185
s, respectively, after repositioning the pipette. In lower right, the image was captured
45 s after repositioning the pipette. Calibration bar indicates 15 ␮m. Supplemental Video
S7B available at http://www.cell.com/cgi/
content/full/109/5/599/DC1 shows the complete sequence from which the images were
taken. Frames were captured at 5 s intervals
and played back at 0.125 s intervals.
(C) Images show the distribution of wild-type
PTEN-GFP (left) and PTEN-GFP lacking the
N-terminal 16 amino acids (right). Images are
representative of over 50 cells that were examined.

The inhibitors decrease cell polarization and motility and
do not specifically alter directional sensing. In mice lacking PI3K␥, neutrophils display defects in chemotaxis
assays, but again it is difficult to separate inhibitory
effects on motility (Hirsch et al., 2000; Li et al., 2000;
Sasaki et al., 2000). Moreover, chemotaxis in lymphocytes is minimally affected, and chemokine-elicited actin polymerization responses are not significantly perturbed in neutrophils or lymphocytes. The incomplete
effects of the disruptions and inhibitors could possibly
be due to the presence of multiple PI3K subtypes or
alternate pathways for phosphoinositide production
(Vanhaesebroeck et al., 2001). It seems that a portion
of the chemoattractant-stimulated actin polymerization
response requires only very small changes in the phosphoinositides and yet, as we show here, these lipids
significantly enhance the response when they are elevated.
Studies have indicated that PTEN specifically dephosphorlylates the D3 position of phosphoinositides and
thereby controls numerous physiological processes

(Maehama and Dixon, 1998). The lipid phosphatase activity of PTEN, which opposes PI3K and downregulates
AKT/PKB, is essential for its tumor suppressor function
(Haas-Kogan et al., 1998; Myers et al., 1998; Stambolic
et al., 1998). In typical cancer cell lines lacking PTEN
and in cells derived from PTEN knockout mice, the levels
of PI(3,4)P2 and PI(3,4,5)P3 are increased (Stambolic et
al., 1998; Sun et al., 1999). The loss of functional PTEN
leads to many abnormalities such as enhanced proliferation and decreased sensitivity to apoptotic signals (Maehama et al., 2001). The gene we have designated as
PTEN and disrupted is highly homologous to its human
counterpart. Furthermore, a point mutation G129E corresponding to that which causes a specific loss of lipid
phosphatase activity in the human enzyme abrogates
the ability of the D. discoideum enzyme to regulate
PI(3,4,5)P3 and PI(3,4)P2 levels in cells (Myers et al., 1998
and data not shown)
Previous studies have suggested that cells lacking
PTEN are flatter and have increased activity of the cytoskeleton around the perimeter (Tamura et al., 1998;

Cell
608

Liliental et al., 2000). Some studies also suggested that
the cells were more motile although directional motility
was not examined. We find, as others have found (Tamura et al., 1998; Liliental et al., 2000), that PTEN loss
causes cells to more actively extend pseudopods. However, since the cells lose their ability to sense and respond appropriately to gradients, their directional chemotactic responses are slower. Moreover, stimulated
actin polymerization is prolonged and exaggerated. It
is possible that similar defects would be observed in
mammalian cells if these features of chemotaxis were
assessed.
The regulation and subcellular distribution of PTEN
activity has not been extensively characterized. The
crystal structure of human PTEN showed that the
C-terminal region contained a C2 domain, which is
thought to bind to membranes (Lee et al., 1999). The
C-terminal regions of the D. discoideum and human
genes are quite homologous, but we have not been able
to specifically define a C2 domain. The N-terminal region
of PTEN contains a putative PI(4,5)P2 binding motif, suggesting a membrane localization. However, subcellular
localization of mammalian PTEN indicates it predominantly distributes throughout the cytoplasm (Whang et
al., 1998; Wu et al., 2000b). In these experiments, it is
possible that overexpression of the protein masked its
normal distribution. Our data show that a fraction of the
PTEN-GFP localizes to the plasma membrane and that
the N-terminal PI(4,5)P2 binding motif is required for this
association. Upon uniform chemoattractant stimulation,
the protein rapidly dissociates from the membrane and
gradually returns as the cells adapt to the stimulus.
When cells are exposed to a gradient, the protein dissociates from the membrane on the side of the cell facing
the higher concentration of chemoattractant. During
chemotaxis, the PTEN-GFP dissociates from the membrane at the leading edge of the cell and accumulates
at the rear. These behaviors are the exact opposite of
those of the PH domain, indicating that the change in
PTEN distribution regulates the transient increase in
phosphoinositides and localizes the response to a gradient. It is interesting to speculate that the dissociation
of PTEN from the membrane is caused by a decrease
in PI(4,5)P2 levels which may occur upon stimulation.
This would comprise a feedback loop that might amplify
the response. A separate feedback loop whereby
PI(3,4,5)P3 leads to activation of PI3K has also been
proposed (Niggli, 2000). These two feedback loops may
act in concert to generate a highly amplified signal.
The cells lacking PTEN activity are defective in both
polarization and directional sensing, suggesting that
similar biochemical mechanisms underlie both processes. The pten⫺ cells are able to weakly sense the
direction of a chemotactic gradient since membraneassociated phosphoinositides, reflected as PHCrac-GFP
binding, are broadly distributed to the front half of the
cell. In addition, the large activation of physiological
responses in pten⫺ cells induced by uniform stimulation
eventually subsides. This implies that the phosphoinositide synthetic activity (i.e., PI3K activity) must still be
regulated in the pten⫺ cells and that other lipid-degrading enzymes (such as PI 4- or PI 5-phosphatase) operate
to remove phosphoinositides. This regulation of PI3K
activity is apparently sufficient to mediate rudimentary

directional sensing in the absence of PTEN function. In
polarized cells, chemoattractant receptors are uniformly
distributed on the membrane (Xiao et al., 1997; Servant
et al., 1999). However, G protein ␤ subunits are localized
in a shallow anterior-posterior gradient (Jin et al., 2000),
and there is a faster frequency of receptor-chemoattractant interaction at the front of a polarized cell (Ueda et
al., 2001). The accumulation of PTEN-GFP at the rear
of a cell is expected to influence the distribution of phosphoinositides on the cell membranes and may therefore
also strongly contribute to polarization. Indeed, PTEN
shares homology with tensin, suggesting it might associate with cytoskeletal components. Thus, polarization
may result from a spontaneous redistribution of the
same signal transduction components that are involved
in directional sensing.
Experimental Procedures
Cell Growth and Development
Wild-type AX2 and pten⫺ cells were cultured axenically in HL5 medium (Cocucci and Sussman, 1970) at 22⬚C. Transformants carrying
PHCrac-GFP and PTEN-GFP expression constructs were grown in
HL5 medium containing 40 ␮g/ml G418 sulfate. These strains were
also grown on nutrient SM agar plates with Klebsiella aerogenes.
To assess developmental phenotypes, cells growing exponentially
in HL5 medium were washed twice in development buffer (DB) and
plated on 1.5% nonnutrient DB agar at 1 ⫻ 106 cells/cm2. To determine plaque size, cells were plated as individual clones with K.
aerogenes on SM agar plates and cultured at 22⬚C for 5 days.
Construction of pten⫺ Cells
The accession number for the PTEN gene is AF483827. To construct
the PTEN disruption vector, genomic DNA was amplified using primers P195 (5⬘-GCAATGGGATTTCCAAGTGAAAAGTTG-3⬘) and P1614
(5⬘-TGATGGGTTTGATTCTTGTTGTACAGGG-3⬘) located in the PTEN
coding region and cloned into the TA cloning vector pCR2.1 (Invitrogen). Blasticidin S resistance (BSR) cassette from pBsr⌬Bam
(Adachi et al., 1994) was inserted into the Hinc II site of the PTEN
genomic fragment (P195:P1614) and then digested with appropriate
restriction enzymes to remove the vector backbone sequence. The
linearized disruption vector (10 ␮g) was introduced into growthphase AX2 cells by electroporation using a Bio-Rad gene pulser.
Transformants were selected in HL5 containing 10 ␮g/ml Blasticidin
S sulfate on plastic dishes. After 5 days, cells were harvested and
cloned on SM-agar plates containing 10 ␮g/ml of Blasticidin S with
K. aerogenes. Resultant colonies were picked and checked for disruption of respective genes by PCR and Southern blot analysis. The
formal gene and strain nanes for PTEN gene and these pten⫺ cells
are proposed as ptnA and ptnA⫺.
Construction of the GFP Fusion Protein Expression Vector
and Transformation of Cells
The full-length PTEN cDNA sequence was amplified by PCR using
primers P111 (5⬘-GGAGATCTGGAAACAAATAGAATGAG-3⬘), which
created a Bgl II site at the 5⬘ end and P1664 (5⬘-CCCTCGAGTCTGC
TTCAACCTTTGGAGC-3⬘), which created a XhoI site at the 5⬘ end, and
cloned upstream of the start codon of the GFP gene. The resulting
PTEN-GFP construct was sequenced and finally cloned downstream of the actin 15 promoter of the D. discoideum extrachromosomal vector pJK1 (Pitt et al., 1992). For the expression of PHCracGFP, the PH domain from CRAC was ligated upstream of the GFP
gene and expressed from actin 15 promoter (Jin et al., 2000). These
vectors (10 ␮g) were introduced into growth phase cells by electroporation. Transformants were selected in HL5 containing 10 ␮g/ml
G418. After 7 days, when colonies were visible, cells were harvested
and observed for GFP expression under a fluorescence microscope.
Chemotaxis Assay
Cells grown in shaking culture were washed twice with DB, resuspended at 2 ⫻ 107 cells/ml in shaking, and induced to differentiate

PI 3-Phosphatase and Chemotaxis
609

with 100 nM cAMP pulses at 6 min intervals for 5 hr (Devreotes
et al., 1987). The small-drop chemotaxis assay was performed as
described (Konijn, 1970; van Haastert and Konijn, 1982). Small droplets (0.1 ␮l) having 100–200 differentiated cells were spotted on
1.5% DB agar plates containing 3 mM caffeine. Different doses of
cAMP solution were spotted close to the drops of cells. After 30–60
min in a humidified chamber, chemotactic responses were observed
and scored positive if at least twice as many cells were pressed
against the edge closest to the cAMP droplet as to the opposite
side. Chemotactic movements of cells to a micropipette containing
cAMP were performed as described (Parent et al., 1998). Differentiated cells were plated on a chambered coverglass (Lab-Tek, Nalge
Nunc) and allowed to adhere to the surface. A micropipette filled
with 1 ␮M cAMP was positioned and images of moving cells were
recorded.
Actin Polymerization, Adenylyl Cyclase, and cGMP
Accumulation Assays
Differentiated cells were diluted to 1 ⫻ 107 cells/ml and shaken at
200 rpm with 2 mM caffeine for 30 min. Cells were collected, washed
twice, resuspended at 3 ⫻ 107 cells/ml in PM with 3 mM caffeine,
and shaken at room temperature for 10 min. At various time points
after addition of 1 ␮M cAMP, cells were fixed and stained with TRITCphalloidin to measure the amounts of F actin as described (Kim et
al., 1997). For adenylyl cyclase assay, cells were stimulated at 8 ⫻
107 cells/ml with 1 ␮M cAMP and lysed through the 5 ␮m pore size
nucleopore filters into a reaction mixture containing [␣-32P]ATP. The
amount of [32P]cAMP synthesized in 1 min was measured as described (Theibert and Devreotes, 1986). To measure the guanylyl
cyclase activation, cells at 5 ⫻ 107 cells/ml were stimulated with 1
␮M cAMP. At designated times, reactions were terminated by the
addition of perchloric acid and cGMP accumulation was counted by
a competitive radioimmunoassay, [3H]GMP detection kit (Amersham).
Fluorescence Microscopy Analysis on Living Cells
Images of the living cells were observed using an inverted Zeiss
microscope (Axiovert 135 TV) or confocal laser scanning microscope
(Perkin Elmer UltraView) with an inverted microscope (Nikon).
Immunoblot Analysis of PH Domain Translocation Assay
Cells were pretreated with caffeine as described above, washed,
and resuspended in PM. Cells were stimulated with 1 ␮M cAMP and
at indicated time points, filter-lysed into ice-cold PM to terminate the
reaction. Membrane fractions were collected by centrifugation at
15,000 ⫻ g for 1 min and subjected to assay by immunoblot of PHCracGFP with anti-GFP antibody (BABCO). Quantification was performed
with NIH Image software.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH grants GM34933 and 57874 to
P.N.D. The authors wish to thank Linnan Tang for constructing the
Supplemental Video S7 and Chris Janetopoulos for assistance in
fluorescence microscopy.
Received: December 20, 2001
Revised: March 4, 2002
References
Adachi, H., Hasebe, T., Yoshinaga, K., Ohta, T., and Sutoh, K. (1994).
Isolation of Dictyostelium discoideum cytokinesis mutants by restriction enzyme-mediated integration of the blasticidin S resistance
marker. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 205, 1808–1814.
Baggiolini, M. (2001). Chemokines in pathology and medicine. J.
Intern. Med. 250, 91–104.

nuclear fractions of cellular slime mold amebas. J. Cell Biol. 45,
399–407.
Devreotes, P.N., Potel, M.J., and MacKay, S.A. (1983). Quantitative
analysis of cyclic AMP waves mediating aggregation in Dictyostelium discoideum. Dev Biol. 96, 405–415.
Devreotes, P., Fontana, D., Klein, P., Sherring, J., and Theibert, A.
(1987). Transmembrane signaling in Dictyostelium. Methods Cell
Biol. 28, 299–331.
Funamoto, S., Milan, K., Meili, R., and Firtel, R.A. (2001). Role of
phosphatidylinositol 3⬘ kinase and a downstream pleckstrin homology domain-containing protein in controlling chemotaxis in Dictyostelium. J. Cell Biol. 153, 795–810.
Goberdhan, D.C., Paricio, N., Goodman, E.C., Mlodzik, M., and Wilson, C. (1999). Drosophila tumor suppressor PTEN controls cell
size and number by antagonizing the Chico/PI3-kinase signaling
pathway. Genes Dev. 13, 3244–3258.
Haas-Kogan, D., Shalev, N., Wong, M., Mills, G., Yount, G., and
Stokoe, D. (1998). Protein kinase B (PKB/Akt) activity is elevated in
glioblastoma cells due to mutation of the tumor suppressor PTEN/
MMAC. Curr. Biol. 8, 1195–1198.
Haugh, J.M., Codazzi, F., Teruel, M., and Meyer, T. (2000). Spatial
sensing in fibroblasts mediated by 3⬘ phosphoinositides. J. Cell Biol.
151, 1269–1280.
Hirsch, E., Katanaev, V.L., Garlanda, C., Azzolino, O., Pirola, L.,
Silengo, L., Sozzani, S., Mantovani, A., Altruda, F., and Wymann,
M.P. (2000). Central role for G protein-coupled phosphoinositide
3-kinase ␥ in inflammation. Science 287, 1049–1053.
Janetopoulos, C., Jin, T., and Devreotes, P. (2001). Receptor-mediated activation of heterotrimeric G proteins in living cells. Science
291, 2408–2411.
Jin, T., Zhang, N., Long, Y., Parent, C.A., and Devreotes, P.N. (2000).
Localization of the G protein ␤␥ complex in living cells during chemotaxis. Science 287, 1034–1036.
Kim, J.Y., Soede, R.D., Schaap, P., Valkema, R., Borleis, J.A., Van
Haastert, P.J., Devreotes, P.N., and Hereld, D. (1997). Phosphorylation of chemoattractant receptors is not essential for chemotaxis
or termination of G-protein-mediated responses. J. Biol. Chem. 272,
27313–27318.
Kim, C.H., Hangoc, G., Cooper, S., Helgason, C.D., Yew, S., Humphries, R.K., Krystal, G., and Broxmeyer, H.E. (1999). Altered responsiveness to chemokines due to targeted disruption of SHIP. J. Clin.
Invest. 104, 1751–1759.
Konijn, T.M. (1970). Microbiological assay of cyclic 3⬘,5⬘-AMP. Experientia 26, 367–369.
Lee, J.O., Yang, H., Georgescu, M.M., Di Cristofano, A., Maehama,
T., Shi, Y., Dixon, J.E., Pandolfi, P., and Pavletich, N.P. (1999). Crystal
structure of the PTEN tumor suppressor: implications for its phosphoinositide phosphatase activity and membrane association. Cell
99, 323–334.
Levchenko, A., and Iglesias, P.A. (2002). Models of eukaryotic gradient sensing: application to chemotaxis of amoebae and neutrophils.
Biophys. J. 82, 50–63.
Li, Z., Jiang, H., Xie, W., Zhang, Z., Smrcka, A.V., and Wu, D. (2000).
Roles of PLC-␤2 and -␤3 and PI3K␥ in chemoattractant-mediated
signal transduction. Science 287, 1046–1049.
Liliental, J., Moon, S.Y., Lesche, R., Mamillapalli, R., Li, D., Zheng,
Y., Sun, H., and Wu, H. (2000). Genetic deletion of the Pten tumor
suppressor gene promotes cell motility by activation of Rac1 and
Cdc42 GTPases. Curr. Biol. 10, 401–404.
Lilly, P.J., and Devreotes, P.N. (1995). Chemoattractant and GTP ␥
S-mediated stimulation of adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium requires
translocation of CRAC to membranes. J. Cell Biol. 129, 1659–1665.

Buczynski, G., Grove, B., Nomura, A., Kleve, M., Bush, J., Firtel, R.A.,
and Cardelli, J. (1997). Inactivation of two Dictyostelium discoideum
genes, DdPIK1 and DdPIK2, encoding proteins related to mammalian phosphatidylinositide 3-kinases, results in defects in endocytosis, lysosome to postlysosome transport, and actin cytoskeleton
organization. J. Cell Biol. 136, 1271–1286.

Maehama, T., and Dixon, J.E. (1998). The tumor suppressor, PTEN/
MMAC1, dephosphorylates the lipid second messenger, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 13375–13378.

Cocucci, S.M., and Sussman, M. (1970). RNA in cytoplasmic and

Meili, R., Ellsworth, C., Lee, S., Reddy, T.B., Ma, H., and Firtel, R.A.

Maehama, T., Taylor, G.S., and Dixon, J.E. (2001). PTEN and myotubularin: novel phosphoinositide phosphatases. Annu. Rev. Biochem.
70, 247–279.

Cell
610

(1999). Chemoattractant-mediated transient activation and membrane localization of Akt/PKB is required for efficient chemotaxis
to cAMP in Dictyostelium. EMBO J. 18, 2092–2105.
Myers, M.P., Pass, I., Batty, I.H., Van der Kaay, J., Stolarov, J.P.,
Hemmings, B.A., Wigler, M.H., Downes, C.P., and Tonks, N.K. (1998).
The lipid phosphatase activity of PTEN is critical for its tumor supressor function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 13513–13518.
Niggli, V. (2000). A membrane-permeant ester of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP(3)) is an activator of human neutrophil
migration. FEBS Lett. 473, 217–221.
Ogg, S., and Ruvkun, G. (1998). The C. elegans PTEN homolog,
DAF-18, acts in the insulin receptor-like metabolic signaling pathway. Mol. Cell 2, 887–893.
Parent, C.A., and Devreotes, P.N. (1996). Molecular genetics of signal transduction in Dictyostelium. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65, 411–440.
Parent, C.A., and Devreotes, P.N. (1999). A cell’s sense of direction.
Science 284, 765–770.
Parent, C.A., Blacklock, B.J., Froehlich, W.M., Murphy, D.B., and
Devreotes, P.N. (1998). G protein signaling events are activated at
the leading edge of chemotactic cells. Cell 95, 81–91.
Pitt, G.S., Milona, N., Borleis, J., Lin, K.C., Reed, R.R., and Devreotes,
P.N. (1992). Structurally distinct and stage-specific adenylyl cyclase
genes play different roles in Dictyostelium development. Cell 69,
305–315.
Rickert, P., Weiner, O.D., Wang, F., Bourne, H.R., and Servant, G.
(2000). Leukocytes navigate by compass: roles of PI3K␥ and its lipid
products. Trends Cell Biol. 10, 466–473.
Sasaki, T., Irie-Sasaki, J., Jones, R.G., Oliveira-dos-Santos, A.J.,
Stanford, W.L., Bolon, B., Wakeham, A., Itie, A., Bouchard, D., Kozieradzki, I., et al. (2000). Function of PI3K␥ in thymocyte development,
T cell activation, and neutrophil migration. Science 287, 1040–1046.
Servant, G., Weiner, O.D., Neptune, E.R., Sedat, J.W., and Bourne,
H.R. (1999). Dynamics of a chemoattractant receptor in living neutrophils during chemotaxis. Mol. Biol. Cell 10, 1163–1178.
Servant, G., Weiner, O.D., Herzmark, P., Balla, T., Sedat, J.W., and
Bourne, H.R. (2000). Polarization of chemoattractant receptor signaling during neutrophil chemotaxis. Science 287, 1037–1040.
Stambolic, V., Suzuki, A., de la Pompa, J.L., Brothers, G.M., Mirtsos,
C., Sasaki, T., Ruland, J., Penninger, J.M., Siderovski, D.P., and
Mak, T.W. (1998). Negative regulation of PKB/Akt-dependent cell
survival by the tumor suppressor PTEN. Cell 95, 29–39.
Sun, H., Lesche, R., Li, D.M., Liliental, J., Zhang, H., Gao, J., Gavrilova, N., Mueller, B., Liu, X., and Wu, H. (1999). PTEN modulates
cell cycle progression and cell survival by regulating phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5,-trisphosphate and Akt/protein kinase B signaling
pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 6199–6204.
Tamura, M., Gu, J., Matsumoto, K., Aota, S., Parsons, R., and Yamada, K.M. (1998). Inhibition of cell migration, spreading, and focal
adhesions by tumor suppressor PTEN. Science 280, 1614–1617.
Theibert, A., and Devreotes, P.N. (1986). Surface receptor-mediated
activation of adenylate cyclase in Dictyostelium. Regulation by guanine nucleotides in wild-type cells and aggregation deficient mutants. J. Biol. Chem. 261, 15121–15125.
Ueda, M., Sako, Y., Tanaka, T., Devreotes, P., and Yanagida, T.
(2001). Single-molecule analysis of chemotactic signaling in Dictyostelium cells. Science 294, 864–867.
van Es, S., and Devreotes, P.N. (1999). Molecular basis of localized
responses during chemotaxis in amoebae and leukocytes. Cell. Mol.
Life Sci. 55, 1341–1351.
van Haastert, P.J., and Konijn, T.M. (1982). Signal transduction in
the cellular slime molds. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 26, 1–17.
Vanhaesebroeck, B., Leevers, S.J., Ahmadi, K., Timms, J., Katso,
R., Driscoll, P.C., Woscholski, R., Parker, P.J., and Waterfield, M.D.
(2001). Synthesis and function of 3-phosphorylated inositol lipids.
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 70, 535–602.
Wardlaw, A.J., Brightling, C., Green, R., Woltmann, G., and Pavord,
I. (2000). Eosinophils in asthma and other allergic diseases. Br. Med.
Bull. 56, 985–1003.
Whang, Y.E., Wu, X., Suzuki, H., Reiter, R.E., Tran, C., Vessella, R.L.,

Said, J.W., Isaacs, W.B., and Sawyers, C.L. (1998). Inactivation of
the tumor suppressor PTEN/MMAC1 in advanced human prostate
cancer through loss of expression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95,
5246–5250.
Wu, D., Huang, C.K., and Jiang, H. (2000a). Roles of phospholipid
signaling in chemoattractant-induced responses. J. Cell Sci. 113
(part 17), 2935–2940.
Wu, X., Hepner, K., Castelino-Prabhu, S., Do, D., Kaye, M.B., Yuan,
X.J., Wood, J., Ross, C., Sawyers, C.L., and Whang, Y.E. (2000b).
Evidence for regulation of the PTEN tumor suppressor by a membrane-localized multi-PDZ domain containing scaffold protein
MAGI-2. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 4233–4238.
Wymann, M.P., Sozzani, S., Altruda, F., Mantovani, A., and Hirsch, E.
(2000). Lipids on the move: phosphoinositide 3-kinases in leukocyte
function. Immunol. Today 21, 260–264.
Xiao, Z., Zhang, N., Murphy, D.B., and Devreotes, P.N. (1997). Dynamic distribution of chemoattractant receptors in living cells during
chemotaxis and persistent stimulation. J. Cell Biol. 139, 365–374.
Zhou, K., Pandol, S., Bokoch, G., and Traynor-Kaplan, A.E. (1998).
Disruption of Dictyostelium PI3K genes reduces [32P]phosphatidylinositol 3,4 bisphosphate and [32P]phosphatidylinositol trisphosphate levels, alters F actin distribution and impairs pinocytosis. J.
Cell Sci. 111 (part 2), 283–294.

