THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOL. 285, NO. 11, pp. 7938 –7946, March 12, 2010
© 2010 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc. Printed in the U.S.A.

Phosphoinositide-dependent Protein Kinase (PDK) Activity
Regulates Phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-Trisphosphate-dependent
and -independent Protein Kinase B Activation and Chemotaxis*□
S

Received for publication, November 25, 2009 Published, JBC Papers in Press, January 14, 2010, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M109.089235

Yoichiro Kamimura and Peter N. Devreotes1
From the Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205
Chemotactic cells must sense shallow extracellular gradients
and produce localized intracellular responses. We previously
showed that the temporal and spatial activation of two protein
kinase B (PKB) homologues, PkbA and PkbR1, in Dictyostelium
discoideum by phosphorylation of activation loops (ALs) and
hydrophobic motifs had important roles in chemotaxis. We
found that hydrophobic motif phosphorylation depended on
regulation of TorC2 (target of rapamycin complex 2); however,
the regulation of AL phosphorylation remains to be determined
at a molecular level. Here, we show that two PDK (phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase) homologues, PdkA and
PdkB, function as the key AL kinases. Cells lacking both PdkA
and PdkB are defective in PKB activation, chemotaxis, and fruiting body formation upon nutrient deprivation. The pleckstrin
homology domain of PdkA is sufficient to localize it to the membrane, but transient activation of PdkA is independent of PIP3 as
well as TorC2 and dispensable for full function. These results
confirm the importance of the TorC2-PDK-PKB pathway in
chemotaxis and point to a novel mechanism of regulation of
PDKs by chemoattractant.

Many cells can detect extracellular chemical gradients and
move toward or away from higher concentrations in a process
referred to as chemotaxis or directed cell migration. In embryogenesis, chemotaxis is used repeatedly to rearrange cells, for
instance, during primordial germ cell migration, organ formation, and wiring of the nervous system. In the adult, chemotaxis
mediates trafficking of immune cells and participates in wound
healing and in maintenance of tissue architecture and allows
stem cells to target to and persist in their niches. Chemotaxis
also plays an important role in pathological states such as excessive inflammation and cancer metastasis.
Current studies indicate that chemotaxis involves a network
of interconnected signaling pathways (1). In one important
series of events, chemoattractants activate PI3Ks2 that produce

* This work was supported, in whole or in part, by National Institutes of Health
Grants GM 28007 and GM 34933 (to P. N. D.).
The on-line version of this article (available at http://www.jbc.org) contains
supplemental Table 1, Figs. S1 and S3–S5, and Movies S1 and S2.
1
To whom correspondence should be addressed: 725 N. Wolfe St., Wood
Basic Science Bldg., Rm. 114, Baltimore, MD, 21205-2105. Tel.: 1-410-9553225; Fax: 1-410-614-9461; E-mail: pnd@jhmi.edu.
2
The abbreviations used are: PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PDK, phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase; TorC2, target of rapamycin complex 2; PKB, protein kinase B; PIP3, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate; AL, activation loop; HM, hydrophobic motif; PiaA, PianissimoA; BSR,
□
S

7938 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
This is an Open Access article under the CC BY license.

the accumulation of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate
(PIP3) and the protrusion of pseudopodia at the leading edge of
the cell (2). It is thought that the effects of PIP3 are mediated by
the local recruitment and activation of AKT/PKB. Unregulated
overproduction of PIP3, as occurs in cells lacking the lipid phosphatases, PTEN or SHIP1, causes ectopic projections outside of
the leading edge and impairs chemotaxis (3, 4). Similarly, direct
activation of PI3K, bypassing the receptor, is sufficient to trigger cell extensions (5). Surprisingly, however, cells lacking PIP3
production can still carry out chemotaxis (6 – 8). The apparent
paradox was explained in Dictyostelium discoideum by showing
that chemoattractants still trigger the phosphorylation of PKB
substrates in the absence of PIP3 (9). This is because the cAMP
signaling pathways converge on two PKB homologues, a PIP3dependent enzyme, PkbA, with a PIP3-specific pleckstrin
homology (PH) domain at its N terminus and a PIP3-independent enzyme, PkbR1, which is tethered to the plasma membrane via N-terminal myristoylation (10, 11). The activation of
the PKBs, including the PIP3-independent regulation of PkbR1,
is restricted to the leading edge of chemotaxing cells, and the
substrates of these kinases are believed to regulate the cytoskeleton (9). So far, six novel substrates have been found to be
targets of the PKBs. These include the cytoskeletal protein,
TalinB, the Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factors GefN and
GefS, the PI(4)P-dependent PI5 kinase PI5K, the Rho GTPaseactivating enzyme GacQ, and the p21-activated kinase PakA (9,
12). It is not yet understood how phosphorylation of these substrates links chemoattractant signaling to the cytoskeleton.
When cells are stimulated with the chemoattractant, PkbA
and PkbR1 are rapidly and transiently phosphorylated within
their hydrophobic motifs (HMs) and activation loops (ALs),
as has been described for their mammalian counterparts (9,
13–15). Phosphorylation of the HMs of the two PKBs is mediated by TorC2 (target of rapamycin complex 2). One of the
earliest genetic defects in chemotaxis to be described in D. discoideum was in the gene PianissimoA (piaA), later shown to be
a subunit of TorC2 (16, 17). In PkbA, AL phosphorylation also
requires recruitment of the enzyme to the membrane by transient accumulation of PIP3. Because AL phosphorylation in
PkbR1 is independent of PIP3, the mechanism of its regulation
is not known. It may rely, for example, on an observed absolute
prerequisite for HM phosphorylation. However, a version of
PkbR1 containing phosphomimetic substitution in the HM,
blasticidin S-resistant; PH, pleckstrin homology; GFP, green fluorescent
protein; DB, development buffer.

VOLUME 285 • NUMBER 11 • MARCH 12, 2010

PDK Activity in Chemotaxis
expressed in cells lacking PiaA, is still phosphorylated on the AL
with normal kinetics, suggesting an independent layer of regulation of AL phosphorylation (9).
To understand the spatial and temporal regulation of the
PKBs by chemoattractant, we sought to determine the kinases
that phosphorylate the ALs and study their regulation. In mammalian cells, AL phosphorylation in AKT/PKB is mediated by
PDK1 (14, 18). There are two PDK1 homologues in the D. discoideum genome, PdkA and PdkB. In this report, we determine
the roles of these enzymes in activation of PkbA and PkbR1 and
in regulation of the chemotactic response.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Cell Growth and Differentiation—Cells were cultured
axenically in HL5 medium at 22 °C. pdkA⫺, pdkB⫺, and
pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells were constructed in an AX3 background
using a disruption cassette containing the blasticidin S-resistant (BSR) gene. The PDKA disruption plasmid was made by the
following steps. First, the region between ⫹744 and ⫹1561
(where ⫹1 is the first base of the open reading frame in the
pdkA genomic DNA) was deleted, and a SmaI site was created
by PCR using pCR4-PDKA as a template and primers YK176
and YK177. Next, the BSR cassette was inserted into the SmaI
site, and the DNA was digested with the EcoRI before transformation into D. discoideum cells. PDKB disruption plasmid was
also made by the same strategy as PDKA. The region between
⫹849 and ⫹1967 of the pdkB genomic DNA was replaced by
the BSR cassette using pCR4-PDKB and primers YK178 and
YK179. The DNA was digested with NotI and PmeI. The
pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ double mutant cells were made as follows. The
BSR gene in pdkA⫺ cells was removed by transformation with a
Cre expression plasmid. Then, the pdkB gene was disrupted as
above. All mutants were confirmed by Southern blot analysis.
To assess developmental phenotypes, cells growing in HL5
medium were washed with development buffer (DB) and plated on
1.5% non-nutrient DB agar. For differentiation, cells grown in HL5
were washed with DB and starved in DB for 1 h at 2 ⫻ 107 cells/ml
and then pulsed with 60 nM of cAMP every 6 min for 4 h (19).
Plasmid Construction—A pdkA genomic DNA fragment was
amplified by PCR using AX3 genomic DNA as a template and
primers YK151 and YK166 and cloned into pCR4 and finally
denoted as pCR4-PDKA. A pdkB genomic DNA fragment was
amplified by PCR using AX3 genomic DNA as a template and
primers YK154 and YK155 and cloned into pCR4 and finally
denoted as pCR4-PDKB. For GFP fusion constructs, both DNA
were cloned into the BglII and XhoI sites of pEX-GFP. For
PDKA deletion series, each region was amplified by PCR and
cloned in pEX-GFP.
Immunoblotting—Differentiated cells were shaken at 200
rpm in DB with 5 mM caffeine for 30 min, washed with DB
twice, resuspended at 2 ⫻ 107 cells/ml in DB, and kept on ice
before assay. Cells were stimulated with 1 ␮M cAMP, lysed in
SDS sample buffer at various time points, and boiled for 5 min.
Samples were subjected to electrophoresis on 4 –15% SDSPAGE gels. After electrophoresis, proteins were transferred to a
polyvinylidene difluoride membrane. The membrane was
blocked with 5% skim milk in Tris-buffered saline with 0.1%
Tween 20 and probed with the indicated antibodies. The GFP
MARCH 12, 2010 • VOLUME 285 • NUMBER 11

polyclonal antibody was homemade. All phospho-specific
antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology
including anti-phospho-PKB substrate antibody (110B7),
anti-phospho-PDK docking motif antibody (18A2), antiphospho-protein kinase C (pan) antibody (190D10).
Micropipette Assay for Chemotaxis—Differentiated cells
were plated on a chambered coverglass (Lab-Tek, Nalgen
Nunc) and allowed to adhere to the surface. A micropipette
filled with 10 ␮M cAMP was placed into the field of view. The
response of the cells was recorded by time-lapse video every 30 s
for 30 min. Chemotactic parameters were analyzed by software
packages provided by Y. Xiong and P.A. Iglesias.3 “Speed” was
calculated as the total length of the track divided by the elapsed
time. “Chemotaxis speed” was calculated as the distance (d1 ⫺
d2), where d1 and d2 are the start and the end point of the
migration path to the micropipette, divided by the elapsed time.
“Chemotactic index” was calculated by an instantaneous,
weighted chemotaxis index. For each frame, the cosine of the
angle between the direction of movement and the direction to
the micropipette was determined. These values were weighted
according to the length of the movement step and averaged.
“Persistence” was calculated as the shortest linear length
between the start and end point of the migration path divided
by the total length traveled by the cell.
Protein Translocation to Membrane Assay—Differentiated
cells were placed on a chambered coverglass and stimulated
at 1 ␮M cAMP. The images were taken at time-lapse intervals
of 2 s for 1 min. For the biochemical translocation assay,
differentiated cells were stimulated with 1 ␮M cAMP and
lysed through a 5-␮m pore membrane with an equal amount
of basal buffer. The membrane-enriched fraction was collected by microcentrifugation.

RESULTS
PdkA and PdkB Are the Activation Loop Kinases of PkbA and
PkbR1—To examine whether PDK homologues in D. discoideum function as the AL kinases, we generated single and double-null mutants of the two PDK1 (phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1) family kinases PdkA (DDB0216243) and
PdkB (DDB0216246) in the D. discoideum genome by homologous recombination and examined AL and HM phosphorylations in PkbA and PkbR1. Within the kinase domain, PdkA and
PdkB share 52 and 47% identity with mammalian (human)
PDK1. Furthermore, like mammalian PDK1, both have a PH
domain at the C terminus (Fig. 1A) (20). As previously shown, in
wild-type cells, the phosphorylation levels of PkbR1 and PkbA
at Thr309 and Thr278 in the ALs, respectively, increased transiently and subsided within 2 min (Fig. 1B) (9). In pdkA⫺ cells,
these AL phosphorylations of both PkbR1 and PkbA were
reduced, whereas in pdkB⫺ cells, there was no significant difference from wild-type cells. However, AL phosphorylation of
PkbR1 was further reduced in pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells to only 3%
of that in wild-type cells. In contrast, the AL phosphorylation of
PkbA was not further reduced in pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells compared
with the pdkA⫺ cells. We also examined phosphorylation of the
HM of PkbR1 at Thr470 in each of the cell lines. In wild-type
3

Y. Xiong and P. A. Iglesias, manuscript in submission.

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY

7939

PDK Activity in Chemotaxis

FIGURE 1. PdkA and PdkB are the activation loop kinases of PkbA and
PkbR1. A, PdkA and PdkB are schematically represented and share 67 and
58% similarities in a kinase (thick black bars) and PH domain (circles), respectively. B, wild-type (WT), pdkA⫺, pdkB⫺, and pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells were stimulated with 1 ␮M cAMP, and cell extracts were prepared at the indicated times.
The phosphorylation levels of the AL, Thr309 for PkbR1 and Thr278 for PkbA,
the HM, Thr470 for PkbR1, and the PKB substrates were detected by immunoblotting with ␣-phospho-protein kinase C (pan) antibody, ␣-phospho-PDK
docking motif antibody, and ␣-phospho-PKB substrate antibody, respectively. pp350, pp200, pp180 (including GefN), pp140, pp110 (including GefS
and PI5K), pp90, and pp65/67 (including GacQ) were already assigned as PKB
substrates in ␣-phospho-PKB substrate antibody staining experiments. The
protein-transferred membrane was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue
(CBB) as a loading control. C, AL phosphorylations of PkbR1 and PkbA (upper
panel) and PKB substrates phosphorylations (lower panel) were compared
in pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cell extracts expressing vector (V), PdkA-GFP, or PdkB-GFP

7940 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY

cells, HM phosphorylation increased transiently with kinetics
similar to the AL phosphorylation. Compared with wild-type,
the integrated levels of phosphorylation were 41% in pdkA⫺,
100% in pdkB⫺ cells, and 5% in pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells. Previously,
we found that alanine substitution of the AL phosphorylation
site of PkbR1 caused an ⬃50% reduction of HM phosphorylation (9).
To examine the consequences of the reduced AL phosphorylations of PKB kinases, the cell extracts from each of the cell
lines were immunoblotted by the anti-phosphorylation-specific PKB substrates antibodies. As previously shown, pp350,
pp200, pp180, pp140, pp110, pp90, and pp65/67 comprise substrates of the PKBs (9). In wild-type cells, phosphorylation in
these bands increases rapidly and then subsides within several
minutes. The phosphorylation levels of these bands were
decreased in accordance with the decreased phosphorylation
levels of PkbR1 and PkbA at the AL site. These observations
show the importance of AL phosphorylation of the PKBs.
To verify the specificity of these defects in AL phosphorylations, PdkA-GFP or PdkB-GFP were ectopically expressed in
the pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells. As shown in the upper panel of Fig. 1C,
PdkA-GFP expression restored the AL phosphorylations of
PkbR1 and PkbA to wild-type levels. However, PdkB-GFP only
functioned for PkbR1 phosphorylation. This is consistent with
the observation that in pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ versus pdkA⫺ cells, only
AL phosphorylation of PkbR1 was further reduced (Fig. 1B). In
both cell lines, expression of PdkA-GFP or PdkB-GFP restored
the phosphorylations of PKB substrates (Fig. 1C, lower panel).
Together, these results show that PdkA is a major AL kinase for
PkbR1 and PkbA, and PdkB has a minor activity for PkbR1. The
residual signals remaining in the pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells suggest
that unknown protein kinases also play a minor role for the AL
phosphorylations of PkbR1 and PkbA.
Our data suggest that, although PdkA-GFP and PdkB-GFP
were overexpressed, this did not cause excessive phosphorylation of the PKBs (compare Fig. 1, B and C and supplemental Fig.
S1A). The two proteins were expressed at similar levels and
migrated at 125 kDa and 150 kDa, as expected from the calculated molecular weights of PdkA and PdkB, respectively (supplemental Fig. S1A). PdkB-GFP itself is apparently a PKB substrate, as the overexpressed protein showed up as a heavily
phosphorylated additional band at 150 kDa in the PKB substrate profile (Fig. 1C and see below). It should be noted that
cells overexpressing PkbR1 showed a significant increase of AL
phosphorylation of PkbR1 (data not shown). Taken together,
these data indicate that PkbR1, not either PDK, is limiting for
this phosphorylation event.
Both PdkA and PdkB appear to undergo cAMP-induced
modifications. First, we noticed that within 1 min after cAMP
stimulation, the mobility of PdkA-GFP shifted from an apparent molecular weight of 125 to 140 (Fig. 1D). GFP from cAMPstimulated, GFP-expressing cells did not show any change in
mobility (Fig. 1D). The retardation typically subsided by 5 min
after stimulation, but it was maintained persistently in the presprepared as in B. D, wild-type cells expressing GFP or PdkA-GFP were treated
as in B, and cell extracts taken at the indicated times were probed with an
␣-GFP antibody.

VOLUME 285 • NUMBER 11 • MARCH 12, 2010

PDK Activity in Chemotaxis
pkbA⫺pkbR1⫺ cells (Fig. 2A, lower
panel). Curiously, pdkA⫺pdkB⫺
cells started to aggregate rather suddenly, without typical streams, at an
early development stage (Fig. 2A,
lower panel). We have shown that
pkbA⫺pkbR1⫺ cells are defective
in the cell-to-cell signal process
required for streaming, and these
results suggest that pdkA⫺pdkB⫺
cells are also important in signal
relay.4 To confirm whether the
phenotypes of pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells
depend on PDK activities, the
pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells expressing PdkAGFP were examined. While cells
expressing control vector still
showed defects in streams and fruiting body formation, the PdkA-GFPexpressing cells reversed the both
defects (Fig. 2B).
Because pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells had
reduced PKB activities and showed
similar phenotypes to pkbR1⫺ cells
during nutrient deprivation, we
expected there would be a defect in
their chemotactic activity. Wild⫺
⫺
type cells responded to gradients
FIGURE 2. Cells lacking PdkA and PdkB are defective in early development. A, wild-type and pdkA pdkB
cells were starved on a non-nutrient agar plate and allowed to form fruiting bodies. The images were taken at produced at the tip of a micropithe indicated times. B, pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells expressing vector (V) or PdkA-GFP were treated as in A.
pette filled with 10 ␮M cAMP and
moved directionally with the usual
ence of 10 mM dithiothreitol, which inhibits extracellular phos- streams, whereas the chemotaxis of the pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells was
phodiesterase (supplemental Fig. S1B). Taken together, these impaired (Figs. 3, A and B and supplemental Movies S1 and S2).
results show that the modifications of PdkA are regulated by Compared with wild-type, pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells showed a
cAMP and do not display adaptation. Second, while PdkB-GFP reduced chemotactic index (0.74 versus 0.32) but a nearly idendid not show an apparent mobility shift, as noted above, strong tical speed (Fig. 3C). Also, the mutant cells did not display
staining with the anti-phosphorylation-specific PKB substrates streams in this assay, again suggesting a defect in signal relay
antibodies was observed at ⬃150 kDa, specifically in cells (Fig. 3A). In more magnified images shown in Fig. 3D, wild-type
expressing PdkB-GFP, and the intensity increased with cAMP cells had a typical elongated polarized shape, whereas the
stimulation (Fig. 1C, lower panel). This band is phosphorylated pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells were less polarized. These defects were not
PdkB-GFP, as the size corresponded to PdkB-GFP; the band due to impaired development as wild-type and pdkA⫺pdkB⫺
disappeared in the cell extracts after immunodepletion by an cells showed similar cAR1 expression profile (data not shown).
anti-GFP antibody (data not shown); and PdkB has a putative
To show that the chemotaxis defects were specific, we examPKB phosphorylation motif (RERSST at Thr735) recognized by ined the pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells expressing PdkA-GFP. Similar to
anti-phosphorylation-specific PKB substrates antibodies.
the pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells, the vector-transfected cells had a
PDK Activity Is Required for Proper Chemotaxis—We won- reduced chemotactic activity. On the other hand, the PdkAdered whether the PDKs were required for the developmental GFP expressing cells showed significantly better chemotaxis
process whereby D. discoideum cells spontaneously aggregate with the appearance of streams (supplemental Fig. S3).
into streams of cells that form a mound, which ultimately trans- Together, these results show that the PDKs are required for
forms into a fruiting body. Since pkbR1⫺ and pkbA⫺pkbR1⫺ chemotaxis, streaming, and progression through the mound
cells arrest at the mound stage, we expected that, as PdkA and stage of development.
PdkB were the AL kinases for the PKBs, they should be also
Temporal and Spatial Regulation of the Localization of PdkA
required near this stage of development (9, 10). When wild-type and PdkB—Next, we investigated PdkA and PdkB localizations
cells were placed on a non-nutrient agar, they made streams using the GFP-fused proteins. In mammalian cells, the PH
beginning ⬃5 h and finally formed fruiting bodies (Fig. 2A, domain of PDK1 can bind to PIP3 and has an important funcupper panel). While pdkA⫺ or pdkB⫺ single null cells formed
fruiting bodies like wild-type (data not shown), pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ 4 H. Cai, S. Das, Y. Kamimura, C. A. Parent, and P. N. Devreotes, manuscript in
cells arrested at the mound stage like pkbR1⫺ and
preparation.
MARCH 12, 2010 • VOLUME 285 • NUMBER 11

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY

7941

PDK Activity in Chemotaxis

FIGURE 3. Cells lacking PdkA and PdkB are defective in chemotaxis.
A, wild-type (WT) and pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells were spread on a coverslip and
exposed to cAMP gradients produced by a micropipette containing 10 ␮M
cAMP. The response of cells was recorded by time-lapse video at a 30 s for 30
min frame rate. The first and last images are shown. Scale bars, 50 ␮m. B, a
tracing of the centroid of individual cells is shown. A filled circle indicates the
position of needle. C, speed, chemotaxis speed, chemotaxis index, and persistence were quantified by the methods described under “Experimental Procedures” from the movies of three independent assays. D, cell morphology of
wild-type and pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells were compared at a 32⫻ magnification.

tion for AL phosphorylation, although the localization of PDK1
is controversial (21). PdkA-GFP was associated with the plasma
membrane in chemotaxing cells and also bound to intracellular
vesicles in growth stage cells (Figs. 4, B and C). When chemotaxing cells were treated with caffeine to inhibit de novo cAMP
production, the basal membrane binding of PdkA-GFP was

7942 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY

reduced. Under these conditions, PdkA-GFP transiently translocated to the plasma membrane, peaking within 10 s after
cAMP stimulation (Fig. 4E). The translocation of PdkA-GFP
was also observed by disrupting cells mechanically and enriching the membrane fraction. PdkA-GFP accumulated in membrane-enriched fraction within 15 s of after addition of chemoattractant and returned to the cytosol by 1 min (Fig. 4F). On
the other hand, PdkB-GFP was localized in the cytosol in chemotaxing cells as well as in growth stage (Fig. 4E and data not
shown). Moreover, PdkB-GFP did not change its cytosolic
localization upon cAMP stimulation (Fig. 4E).
To delineate the region that is responsible for the localization
and/or translocation of PdkA-GFP as well as the modification
of PdkA described earlier, we constructed a series of deletions
and assessed their activities. A C-terminal region between residues 477 and 686, including the PH domain, was sufficient for
both the basal membrane localization as well as the chemoattractant-induced translocation (Fig. 4, A and C). As a construct
carrying only a PH domain (amino acids 588 – 686) produced
punctate fluorescence, probably due to artificial aggregations,
we could not further delineate the region. Consistently, an
N-terminal region containing the first 483 residues was localized to the cytosol and did not translocate in response to cAMP
(Fig. 4B and data not shown). Interestingly, while the mobility
of PdkA-GFP shifted during chemoattractant treatment, that of
PdkA-(1– 483)-GFP was constant (Fig. 4A). Further deletion
analysis of PdkA-GFP confirmed that the sites of modification
were mainly located between residues 477 and 547 (supplemental Fig. S4). These data suggest that the region containing the
PH domain of PdkA is necessary and sufficient for the basal
membrane localization and translocation to the membrane as
well as the cAMP-induced mobility shift.
We used pi3k1⫺2⫺ cells, previously shown to have greatly
decreased PIP3 production, to evaluate the dependence of the
localization and translocation of PdkA-GFP on PIP3 (22, 23).
While the basal membrane localization still remained in
pi3k1⫺2⫺ cells, the localization on membrane ruffles and/or on
the macropinosome-like structures was lost (Fig. 4D). We also
found that PdkA-GFP was localized on small unidentified intracellular vesicles. The translocation of PdkA-GFP upon cAMP
addition was lost in pi3k1⫺2⫺ cells when assessed either microscopically or biochemically (data not shown and Fig. 4F). As a
control, AL phosphorylations of PkbR1 and PkbA were
assessed in the same fractions. Although the AL of PkbR1 was
phosphorylated similarly in wild-type and pi3k1⫺2⫺ cells, the
AL phosphorylation of PkbA was disrupted in pi3k1⫺2⫺ cells.
These data are consistent with the previous evidence that ALs
of PkbR1 and PkbA are phosphorylated in PIP3-independent
and -dependent manners, respectively. These results suggest
that PdkA binds to the membrane by two different mechanisms; the basal membrane binding is independent of PIP3, and
the localization on membrane ruffles and the macropinosomelike structures and the translocation are dependent on PIP3.
PH Domain of PdkA Is Dispensable for Function—To evaluate importance of the PH domain-containing region of PdkA in
vivo, the version of PdkA lacking the PH domain (amino acids
1– 483), fused with GFP (PdkA⌬PH-GFP), was expressed in
pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells and the ability to rescue the developmental
VOLUME 285 • NUMBER 11 • MARCH 12, 2010

PDK Activity in Chemotaxis
PkbR1 was reduced by 28 or 1.3%,
respectively (Fig. 5D). The levels of
expression of PdkA⌬PH-GFP were
slightly higher than those of PdkAGFP (Fig. 5C, lower panel). These
results showed that the PH domain
and modifications of PdkA are
dispensable for the AL phosphorylations and the fruiting body formation. However, the PH domain-containing region may have a role for
PdkA functions when the proteins
are expressed endogenously or the
kinase domain is impaired.

DISCUSSION
We have shown that PdkA and
PdkB are chemoattractant-mediated kinases for PkbA and PkbR1
and that activation of the PKBs,
through coordinated phosphorylation on ALs by the PDKs and on
HMs by TorC2 have important
roles in chemotaxis. We showed
previously that PkbA and PkbR1
were heavily dependent on TorC2catalyzed HM phosphorylation. In
this report, we focused on the
FIGURE 4. Spatial and temporal regulation of the localization of PdkA and PdkB. A, the subcellular molecular mechanism of regulation
localization, translocation activities, and chemoattractant-induced modification of a series of deletions of
PdkA are summarized. PM, plasma membrane; ⫹, ⫺, or ND means positive, no response, or not deter- of AL phosphorylation. Assessment
mined for chemoattractant-induced translocation or modification, respectively. B, localization of PdkA- of specific PDK-deficient cell lines
(1– 686)-GFP and PdkA-(1– 483)-GFP were shown in wild-type (WT) cells during chemotaxis. C, fluorescent demonstrated that PdkA is the
images of cells expressing GFP and a series of PdkA deletion proteins fused with GFP are shown.
D, localizations of PdkA-(1– 686)-GFP or PdkA-(477– 686)-GFP are compared in wild-type and pi3k1⫺2⫺ major AL kinase of PkbR1 and
cells. E, to evaluate translocation activity, wild-type cells expressing PdkA-GFP or PdkB-GFP were stimu- PkbA, that PdkB contributes to
lated with 1 ␮M cAMP, and fluorescent images were taken every 2 s. Representative responses are shown
phosphorylation of PkbR1, and that
by a series of time-lapsed images. F, wild-type and pi3k1⫺2⫺ cells were stimulated with 1 ␮M cAMP and
lysed at the indicated times. The membrane-enriched fraction was collected by centrifugation and probed additional minor AL-directed activwith ␣-GFP antibody (upper panel) and ␣-phospho-protein kinase C (pan) antibody (middle panel). Coo- ities are present in cells. The
massie Brilliant Blue (CBB) staining of the membrane for the immunoblotting was used as a loading
pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells were defective in
control. Scale bars represent 10 ␮m.
PKB activation and chemotaxis and
failed to form proper multicellular
and biochemical defects was investigated. As previously shown, structures upon nutrient deprivation. These defects could be
pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells arrested at the mound stage upon nutrient largely reversed by expression of PdkA-GFP. This protein
deprivation. Surprisingly, the expression of PdkA⌬PH-GFP localized on the plasma membrane and was additionally
could restore fruiting body formation as effectively as wild-type recruited by chemotactic stimulation whereas PdkB-GFP
PdkA-GFP (Fig. 5A). To further assess the role of the PH was found in the cytosol. The PH domain of PdkA was suffidomain, we created a chimeric PdkA containing K98R muta- cient for basal localization, which was independent of PI3K,
tion, which weakens kinase activity, along with the deletion as well as for stimulated recruitment to the membrane,
of the PH domain-containing region. In pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells which depended on PI3K. Surprisingly, the PH domain
expressing this chimeric PdkA, compared with a version con- appears to be dispensable for the function of PdkA when the
taining K98R alone, fruiting body formation was partially protein is overexpressed, but the PH domain enhances funcimpaired (Fig. 5B). The mutation K98M, predicted to have no tion when the kinase activity of PdkA is compromised. These
ATP-binding activity, completely eliminated fruiting body for- findings provide further evidence of the significance of the
mation as well as AL phosphorylations (supplemental Fig. S5). TorC2-PDK-PKB pathway in chemotaxis.
The Role of AL Phosphorylation of PkbR1 and PkbA and the
Next, we examined the ability of PdkA⌬PH-GFP to phosphorylate the AL of PkbR1 and PkbA. Surprisingly, PdkA⌬PH-GFP Specificity of PdkA and PdkB—The phosphorylation of the
and PdkA-GFP expressing cells displayed the same intensities highly conserved site within the AL, thought to bring about a
of bands (Fig. 5C, upper panel). However, in cells expressing the conformational change in the molecule, is essential for PKB
PdkA(K98R) or the chimeric protein, AL phosphorylation of activity. We have previously shown that the alanine substituMARCH 12, 2010 • VOLUME 285 • NUMBER 11

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY

7943

PDK Activity in Chemotaxis

FIGURE 5. The PH domain of PdkA is dispensable for function. A, pdkA⫺pdkB⫺
cells expressing vector (V), PdkA-GFP, and PdkA⌬PH-GFP were starved on a nonnutrient agar plate and allowed to form fruiting bodies. B, pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells
expressing PdkA⌬PH-GFP, PdkA(K98R)-GFP, or PdkA⌬PH(K98R)-GFP were
treated as in A. C, cell extracts from pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells expressing vector (V), PdkAGFP, and PdkA⌬PH-GFP were prepared at the indicated times after 1 ␮M cAMP
stimulation and probed with ␣-phospho-protein kinase C (pan) antibody (upper
panel) and ␣-GFP antibody (lower panel). D, the levels of AL phosphorylations of
PkbR1 and PkbA (upper panel) and the expression of PdkA (lower panel) were
compared in cells from B.

tion T309A of PkbR1 caused a nearly complete loss of function.
However, because phosphomimetic substitutions T309D
and T309E were also nonfunctional, we could not conclude
that phosphorylation per se had an essential role (9). Here,
we show that pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells display greatly reduced
phosphorylation at Thr309 of PkbR1 and Thr278 of PkbA and
that kinase activities, assessed by endogenous PKB substrates, are coordinately decreased. Because, as noted above,
minor phosphorylations of PkbR1 and PkbA are still present
in pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells and there are no PDK homologues
other than PdkA and PdkB in the D. discoideum genome,
another related kinase can also phosphorylate the ALs.

7944 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY

Interestingly, pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells also display decreased HM
phosphorylation of PkbR1, consistent with our previously
reported observation that T309A in PkbR1 reduced HM
phosphorylation by 50% by an unknown mechanism. It is
possible that a conformational change caused by AL phosphorylation makes PkbR1 a better substrate for TorC2 or
renders the HM resistant to dephosphorylation. Our data
suggest that the concomitant phosphorylations at the AL
and HM contribute the stable activation of PKBs.
Although PdkA and PdkB are structurally very similar,
there are key differences in their functions. First, the degree
of a contribution to AL phosphorylation is different. Although pdkA⫺ cells show greatly reduced AL phosphorylation of both PKBs, pdkB⫺ cells maintain nearly wild-type
levels. However, when PdkA-GFP or PdkB-GFP was ectopically expressed at similar levels in pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells, the AL
phosphorylation of PkbR1 was recovered in a similar way.
These data suggest that normally PdkA is more highly
expressed than PdkB, leading to the corresponding activities
for AL phosphorylations of the PKBs in wild-type cells. Second, the specificity for PkbR1 and PkbA differs for the two
PDKs. While PdkA can phosphorylate both PkbR1 and
PkbA, PdkB only phosphorylates PkbR1. This preference
could arise from the respective kinase domains, as the deletion of PH domain of PdkA does not change specificity.
Third, while PdkA localizes on the plasma membrane on
structures that resemble macropinosomes and on intracellular vesicles, PdkB localizes in the cytosol. These locations
could be due differences in the PH domains, as the association of PdkA with the membranous structures depends on
its PH domain. Preliminary examination of the binding of
the PH domain of PdkA to lipids using phosphatidylinositol
phosphate strips has shown only weak interaction with phosphatidylinositol 3,4-bisphosphate and phosphatidic acid.5 In
pi3k1⫺2⫺ cells, the macropinosome labeling and the recruitment to the plasma membrane were lost, but the basal association with the membrane and intracellular vesicles remained. The molecule responsible for the basal membrane
binding remains to be determined. Mammalian PDK1 can
physically interact with SGK1 and S6K, which are in the
same family of AGC kinases as PkbR1, via the HM in a phosphorylation-dependent manner (24). However, PdkA-GFP
or the PH domain of PdkA (477– 686)-GFP still localized on
the plasma membrane in pkbR1⫺ cells.6
Regulation of PdkA by Chemoattractants—We have previously shown that phosphorylation of the AL of PkbR1 is strictly
dependent on prior HM phosphorylation. This result is reminiscent of the phosphorylation of the ALs of SGK1 and S6K
by PDK1 in mammalian cells (20). In these instances, PDK1
activity requires phosphorylation-dependent binding to the
HM via a PDK1-interacting fragment pocket. Important residues in the PDK1-interacting fragment pocket of PDK1 are
conserved in PdkA and PdkB. So far, we have not observed a
co-immunoprecipitation of PdkA with PkbR1 in a manner
dependent on HM phosphorylation.6 However, a weak inter5
6

Y. Kamimura and P. N. Devreotes, unpublished results.
Y. Kamimura and P. N. Devreotes, unpublished data.

VOLUME 285 • NUMBER 11 • MARCH 12, 2010

PDK Activity in Chemotaxis
action might be sufficient to promote the phosphorylation of
the AL of PkbR1. Alternatively, phosphorylation of the HM
may cause a conformational change in PkbR1 that is a prerequisite for phosphorylation by the PDKs.
We previously reported that a version of PkbR1, bearing
the phosphomimetic mutation, T470E, at the key site in the
HM, was still transiently phosphorylated at Thr309 in the AL
in piaA⫺ cells that lack TorC2 activity, implying that the
time course of phosphorylation at the AL is not controlled
simply by the profile of HM phosphorylation (9). Rather, it
appears that PdkA is transiently activated by chemoattractant stimulation. That is, either the activity of PdkA is regulated or the chemoattractant somehow renders PkbR1 as a
better substrate for PdkA. A likely upstream regulator of
PdkA-mediated phosphorylation is RasC. When RasC is disrupted, phosphorylation of PkbR1 HM as well as AL is
reduced. Furthermore, when constitutively active RasC,
RasC(Q62L), is expressed in cells, the phosphorylation of
both HM and AL are significantly prolonged.4 The exact
molecular mechanism of this regulation of PdkA by RasC
awaits for further investigation. Since we showed here that
PdkA lacking a PH domain still functions, another portion of
the molecule including a kinase domain is regulated upon
stimulation.
We have shown that the PH domain of PdkA is dispensable
but may enhance the function of the enzyme under certain conditions. The lack of requirement for the PH domain is unexpected but might be consistent with the results from a knock-in
mouse of a PH domain mutant of PDK1 that cannot bind to
PIP3. Cells from these mice showed reduced AL phosphorylation of AKT, but 35% of the activity was still remaining, suggesting that the PH domain of PDK1 is important but not essential
for function (25).
Involvement of PdkA and PdkB in Chemotaxis—The
pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells displayed physiological defects that closely
resembled those of cells lacking PKB activity. The pdkA⫺pdkB⫺
cells arrested at the multicellular “mound stage” of development, like the pkbR1⫺ cells and the pkbA⫺pkbR1⫺ cells (9, 10).
They were also defective in chemotaxis like the pkbR1⫺ cells
(9). These data suggest that PdkA and PdkB function mainly
through PkbR1 and PkbA in the early differentiation phase even
though other AGC family kinases are present in D. discoideum
cells. These similarities are consistent with the levels of AL
phosphorylation observed in each of the strains. However,
the defective phenotypes were not exactly the same in
pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells and pkbR1⫺ or pkbA⫺ pkbR1⫺ cells. First,
the chemotaxis defect, based on the chemotaxis index, in
pkbR1⫺ cells appeared stronger than that in pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells.
Second, although pkbR1⫺ cells maintained a polarized shape
during chemotaxis, pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells were less polarized.
Third, the pkbA⫺ pkbR1⫺ cells did not grow in liquid media
without addition of killed bacteria, but pdkA⫺pdkB⫺ cells did.
These differences might be due to slightly different remaining
levels of PKB activities and different thresholds of each biological event for PKB activity. It would be interesting to compare
the phenotypes of pkbA⫺ pkbR1⫺ cells with the cells that completely lack AL phosphorylations of these PKBs.
MARCH 12, 2010 • VOLUME 285 • NUMBER 11

These findings firmly establish that the TorC2-PDK-PKB
pathway plays an important role in regulating directed cell
migration. This model implies that regulated phosphorylation of a series of specific PKB substrates would regulate
directed migration. We have previously identified six of the
proteins that are targets of the TorC2-PDK-PKB pathway.
This hypothesis is quite distinct from many other theories
about how chemoattractants link to the cytoskeleton. The
multiple points of regulation in the TorC2-PDK-PKB pathway make this pathway well suited to confine signaling to the
leading edge of cells as we have previously reported. It is
interesting that the TorC2-PDK-PKB module, known widely
for its role in regulating cell growth transitions, also plays a
prominent role in directed migration. It is possible that early
phosphorylation events triggered by chemoattractants regulate migration and that subsequent phosphorylation of the
other substrates regulates cell growth.
Acknowledgments—We acknowledge Yuan Xiong and Pablo A. Iglesias for providing analysis software packages for chemotactic parameters and members of the Devreotes laboratory. We appreciate the
dictyBase database for annotation of the pdkA and pdkB gene.

REFERENCES
1. King, J. S., and Insall, R. H. (2009) Trends Cell Biol. 19, 523–530
2. Franca-Koh, J., Kamimura, Y., and Devreotes, P. (2006) Curr. Opin. Genet.
Dev. 16, 333–338
3. Iijima, M., and Devreotes, P. (2002) Cell 109, 599 – 610
4. Nishio, M., Watanabe, K., Sasaki, J., Taya, C., Takasuga, S., Iizuka, R., Balla,
T., Yamazaki, M., Watanabe, H., Itoh, R., Kuroda, S., Horie, Y., Förster, I.,
Mak, T. W., Yonekawa, H., Penninger, J. M., Kanaho, Y., Suzuki, A., and
Sasaki, T. (2007) Nat. Cell Biol. 9, 36 – 44
5. Inoue, T., and Meyer, T. (2008) PLoS One 3, e3068
6. Chen, L., Iijima, M., Tang, M., Landree, M. A., Huang, Y. E., Xiong, Y.,
Iglesias, P. A., and Devreotes, P. N. (2007) Dev. Cell 12, 603– 614
7. van Haastert, P. J., Keizer-Gunnink, I., and Kortholt, A. (2007) J. Cell Biol.
177, 809 – 816
8. Ferguson, G. J., Milne, L., Kulkarni, S., Sasaki, T., Walker, S., Andrews, S.,
Crabbe, T., Finan, P., Jones, G., Jackson, S., Camps, M., Rommel, C.,
Wymann, M., Hirsch, E., Hawkins, P., and Stephens, L. (2007) Nat. Cell
Biol. 9, 86 –91
9. Kamimura, Y., Xiong, Y., Iglesias, P. A., Hoeller, O., Bolourani, P., and
Devreotes, P. N. (2008) Curr. Biol. 18, 1034 –1043
10. Meili, R., Ellsworth, C., and Firtel, R. A. (2000) Curr. Biol. 10, 708 –717
11. Meili, R., Ellsworth, C., Lee, S., Reddy, T. B., Ma, H., and Firtel, R. A. (1999)
EMBO J. 18, 2092–2105
12. Chung, C. Y., Potikyan, G., and Firtel, R. A. (2001) Mol. Cell 7, 937–947
13. Alessi, D. R., Andjelkovic, M., Caudwell, B., Cron, P., Morrice, N., Cohen,
P., and Hemmings, B. A. (1996) EMBO J. 15, 6541– 6551
14. Alessi, D. R., James, S. R., Downes, C. P., Holmes, A. B., Gaffney, P. R.,
Reese, C. B., and Cohen, P. (1997) Curr. Biol. 7, 261–269
15. Sarbassov, D. D., Guertin, D. A., Ali, S. M., and Sabatini, D. M. (2005)
Science 307, 1098 –1101
16. Chen, M. Y., Long, Y., and Devreotes, P. N. (1997) Genes Dev. 11,
3218 –3231
17. Lee, S., Comer, F. I., Sasaki, A., McLeod, I. X., Duong, Y., Okumura, K.,
Yates, J. R., 3rd, Parent, C. A., and Firtel, R. A. (2005) Mol. Biol. Cell 16,
4572– 4583
18. Alessi, D. R., Deak, M., Casamayor, A., Caudwell, F. B., Morrice, N., Norman, D. G., Gaffney, P., Reese, C. B., MacDougall, C. N., Harbison, D.,
Ashworth, A., and Bownes, M. (1997) Curr. Biol. 7, 776 –789
19. Kamimura, Y., Tang, M., and Devreotes, P. (2009) Methods Mol. Biol. 571,
255–270

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY

7945

PDK Activity in Chemotaxis
20. Mora, A., Komander, D., van Aalten, D. M., and Alessi, D. R. (2004) Semin.
Cell Dev. Biol. 15, 161–170
21. Bayascas, J. R. (2008) Cell. Cycle 7, 2978 –2982
22. Funamoto, S., Meili, R., Lee, S., Parry, L., and Firtel, R. A. (2002) Cell 109,
611– 623
23. Huang, Y. E., Iijima, M., Parent, C. A., Funamoto, S., Firtel, R. A., and
Devreotes, P. (2003) Mol. Biol. Cell 14, 1913–1922

7946 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY

24. Biondi, R. M., Kieloch, A., Currie, R. A., Deak, M., and Alessi, D. R. (2001)
EMBO J. 20, 4380 – 4390
25. Bayascas, J. R., Wullschleger, S., Sakamoto, K., García-Martínez, J. M.,
Clacher, C., Komander, D., van Aalten, D. M., Boini, K. M., Lang, F.,
Lipina, C., Logie, L., Sutherland, C., Chudek, J. A., van Diepen, J. A.,
Voshol, P. J., Lucocq, J. M., and Alessi, D. R. (2008) Mol. Cell Biol. 28,
3258 –3272

VOLUME 285 • NUMBER 11 • MARCH 12, 2010

