4502

Research Article

Ras activation and symmetry breaking during
Dictyostelium chemotaxis
Arjan Kortholt, Ineke Keizer-Gunnink, Rama Kataria and Peter J. M. Van Haastert*
Department of Cell Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 7, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands
*Author for correspondence (P.J.M.van.haastert@rug.nl)

Journal of Cell Science

Accepted 9 July 2013
Journal of Cell Science 126, 4502–4513
ß 2013. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd
doi: 10.1242/jcs.132340

Summary
Central to chemotaxis is the molecular mechanism by which a shallow spatial gradient of chemoattractant induces symmetry breaking of
activated signaling molecules. Previously, we have used Dictyostelium mutants to investigate the minimal requirements for chemotaxis,
and identified a basal signaling module providing activation of Ras and F-actin at the leading edge. Here, we show that Ras activation
after application of a pipette releasing the chemoattractant cAMP has three phases, each depending on specific guanine-nucleotideexchange factors (GEFs). Initially a transient activation of Ras occurs at the entire cell boundary, which is proportional to the local
cAMP concentrations and therefore slightly stronger at the front than in the rear of the cell. This transient Ras activation is present in ga2
(gpbB)-null cells but not in gb (gpbA)-null cells, suggesting that Gbc mediates the initial activation of Ras. The second phase is
symmetry breaking: Ras is activated only at the side of the cell closest to the pipette. Symmetry breaking absolutely requires Ga2 and
Gbc, but not the cytoskeleton or four cAMP-induced signaling pathways, those dependent on phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-triphosphate
[PtdIns(3,4,5)P3], cGMP, TorC2 and PLA2. As cells move in the gradient, the crescent of activated Ras in the front half of the cell
becomes confined to a small area at the utmost front of the cell. Confinement of Ras activation leads to cell polarization, and depends on
cGMP formation, myosin and F-actin. The experiments show that activation, symmetry breaking and confinement of Ras during
Dictyostelium chemotaxis uses different G-protein subunits and a multitude of Ras GEFs and GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs).
Key words: Chemotaxis, Shallow gradients, Ras, Amplification, Synergy, Symmetry breaking

Introduction
Ras belongs to the family of small G-proteins that function as
molecular switches to control a wide variety of important cellular
functions. They switch between an inactive GDP-bound and
active GTP-bound state. Ras activity is regulated by guaninenucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs) that catalyze the exchange of
GDP for GTP, thereby activating the Ras protein. GTPaseactivating proteins (GAPs) stimulate an otherwise low intrinsic
GTPase activity by many orders of magnitude, thereby
converting the protein back into the inactive GDP-bound form
(Bourne et al., 1991; Vetter and Wittinghofer, 2001).
Owing to its genetic tractability and high conservation of many
important signaling pathways, Dictyostelium has proven to be an
excellent model for studying small G-protein signaling (Charest
and Firtel, 2007; Kortholt and van Haastert, 2008; Rivero and
Somesh, 2002; Sasaki et al., 2004; Weeks, 2005). Genetic studies
have shown that Ras proteins are involved in regulation of the
cytoskeleton, cell cycle, growth, cell polarity, chemotaxis, and
photo- and thermotaxis of multicellular slugs (Chubb et al., 2000;
Chubb et al., 2002; Reymond et al., 1984; Sutherland et al., 2001;
Weeks, 2005; Wilkins et al., 2000b). RasC and RasG are the bestcharacterized Dictyostelium Ras proteins; both are activated in
response to cAMP (Kae et al., 2004), and are important for the
regulation of the cAMP relay and cAMP-mediated chemotaxis,
respectively (Bolourani et al., 2006; Charest et al., 2010; Lim
et al., 2001; Lim et al., 2005; Tuxworth et al., 1997).
Gradients of diffusive chemicals give rise to chemotaxis
(Hoeller and Kay, 2007; Swaney et al., 2010). Sensitive cells,

such as Dictyostelium or neutrophils, can detect very shallow
spatial gradients of ,1% concentration difference across the cell
(Mato et al., 1975). Concepts from physics and mathematical
models have been employed to understand how cells can detect
such minute spatial signals against a large background of mean
chemoattractant concentration. These concepts include symmetry
breaking to generate a front and rear, signal amplification to
enhance spatial differences and time averaging of spatial
information to reduce stochastic noise (Ambrosi et al., 2004;
Causin and Facchetti, 2009; Tranquillo et al., 1988; Ueda and
Shibata, 2007; van Haastert and Postma, 2007).
The signal transduction cascade for chemotaxis consists of
surface receptors, heterotrimeric and small G-proteins, and
numerous signaling enzymes, leading to the local activation of
the cytoskeleton, predominantly F-actin at the front, and myosin
filaments at the side and the rear of the cell. In Dictyostelium, a
shallow gradient of cAMP induces the activation of cAMP
receptors and the associated heterotrimeric G-protein Ga2bc in a
manner that is approximately proportional to the steepness of the
gradient (Elzie et al., 2009; Jin et al., 2000; Xiao et al., 1997). In
contrast, activation of Ras is much stronger in the front than in
the rear of chemotaxing cells (Charest et al., 2010; Kortholt et al.,
2011; Sasaki et al., 2004; Sasaki and Firtel, 2006; Zhang et al.,
2008). Several studies have shown that inactivation of both rasC
and rasG results in defective cAMP-mediated chemotaxis
(Bolourani et al., 2006; Kortholt et al., 2011). Four signaling
enzymes, PI3K, TorC2, PLA2 and sGC, have been implicated in
chemotaxis (Chen et al., 2007; Kamimura et al., 2008; Liao et al.,

Journal of Cell Science

Symmetry breaking of Ras activation

4503

2010; Veltman et al., 2008). Cells lacking all four enzyme
activities show normal Ras activation in cAMP gradients, but can
only exhibit chemotaxis in steep cAMP gradients (Kortholt et al.,
2011). These observations suggest that symmetry breaking during
chemotaxis occurs at the level of Ras activation, and that
activation of downstream signaling pathways is not essential for
Ras activation and chemotaxis.
Dictyostelium Ras activation occurs downstream of
heterotrimeric G-protein signaling (Kae et al., 2004; Sasaki
et al., 2004), but the exact mechanism is not well understood.
Here we used a sensitive assay to visualize Ras activation in cells
in defined gradients of cAMP. We show that Ras activation after
application of a stable cAMP gradient has three phases. Initially,
a transient activation of Ras occurs at the entire cell boundary,
which is proportional to the local cAMP concentrations and
therefore slightly stronger at the front than in the rear of the cell.
The second phase is symmetry breaking: Ras is activated only at
the side of the cell closest to the pipette. During the third phase,
the crescent of activated Ras in the front half of the cell becomes
confined to a small area at the utmost front of the cell. Mutant
studies revealed that activation, symmetry breaking and
confinement during Dictyostelium chemotaxis use different Gprotein subunits and a multitude of Ras GEFs and GAPs. Taken
together, these experiments provide a conceptual framework to
explain the exquisite sensitivity of cells in sensing shallow
gradients of chemoattractants.
Results
A sensitive assay for Ras activation at the cell boundary

Ras proteins are localized approximately uniformly at the plasma
membrane of Dictyostelium cells (Sasaki et al., 2004; Sasaki and
Firtel, 2009). Stimulation of cells with cAMP does not change the
localization of Ras, but locally stimulates the conversion of Ras
from the inactive Ras-GDP state to active Ras-GTP (Sasaki et al.,
2004; Sasaki and Firtel, 2009). The RBD domain of mammalian
Raf binds specifically to the GTP-bound form of Ras. Ras
activation can therefore be observed by monitoring the
translocation of RBD-Raf–GFP from the cytoplasm to the cell
boundary (Kortholt et al., 2011; Sasaki et al., 2004; Sasaki and
Firtel, 2009). Because boundary pixels also contain cytoplasm,
translocation assays are fundamentally insensitive (Bosgraaf
et al., 2008). Here, we used a more sensitive assay to detect RasGTP by co-expressing cytosolic RFP with RBD-Raf–GFP. In
each boundary pixel (i) the fluorescence intensity of cytosolic
RFP (cRi) refers to the volume of cytosol in that pixel (see
Materials and Methods). The fluorescence intensity of RBD-Raf–
GFP specifically bound to Ras-GTP at the membrane in that pixel
(Y) is the total GFP fluorescence intensity (Gi) minus the
fluorescence intensity of RFP. For direct comparison among
different cells and strains, data are presented as the level of RBDRaf–GFP at the cell membrane relative to the average level of
RBD-Raf–GFP in the cytosol (Gcyt), Y5(Gi2cRi)/,Gcyt ..
Cells in buffer exhibit intrinsic symmetry breaking of
active Ras

In buffer, RBD-Raf–GFP seems to be localized approximately
uniformly in the cell, with little detectable enhanced localization
at the boundary. However, after subtraction of RBD-Raf–GFP in
the cytoplasm using cytosolic RFP, it appears that boundary
pixels retain a significant amount of RBD-Raf–GFP (Fig. 1A;
supplementary material Movie 1). RBD-Raf–GFP is clearly

Fig. 1. Activated Ras-GTP in unstimulated cells. Wild-type cells in buffer
expressing RBD-Raf–GFP and cytosolic RFP. (A) Images of a representative
cell [GFP, RFP, GFP–RFP (Y)]. (B) Ras activation at the boundary (Y); data
are the means6s.d. of 14 cells for different distances from the front of the
extending pseudopod.

present at the cell membrane in the extending pseudopods, but is
also detectable at the plasma membrane of other parts of the cell
(Fig. 1A). RBD-Raf–GFP at the membrane (Y) was measured
around the circumference of 14 cells (Fig. 1B). The front of the
cell is defined by the center boundary point of the extending
pseudopod; RBD-Raf–GFP at the membrane in this point is
Y50.5360.07 (i.e. RBD-Raf–GFP at the membrane is 5367%
that of RBD-Raf–GFP the cytoplasm; mean6s.d., n514 cells).
The membrane at the rear of the cell contains RBD-Raf–GFP at a
level of Y50.1060.05, approximately a fifth that in the
pseudopod. The experiments demonstrate that cells in buffer
exhibit intrinsic symmetry breaking of activated Ras. The front
half of the cell contains ,3-fold more activated Ras than the rearhalf of the cell.
Multiple phases of Ras activation in cAMP gradients

The next question we wanted to answer was how the cAMP
gradients influence the local accumulation of activated Ras.
Wild-type cells expressing RBD-Raf–GFP and RFP were
stimulated with a micropipette releasing cAMP (Fig. 2). The
actual cAMP concentration around the cells was determined in
control experiments using the fluorescent dye Alexa in the
pipette. The cAMP concentration rapidly increases; at a distance
of 50 mm from the pipette cAMP reaches half-maximal levels at
,3.2 s. At 60 mm from the pipette the cAMP concentration is not

4504

Journal of Cell Science 126 (19)

Journal of Cell Science

Fig. 2. Ras activation in cells stimulated with cAMP. Cells
expressing RBD-Raf–GFP and cytosolic RFP were exposed to
(A) a shallow cAMP gradient (28 pM/mm at 2.5 nM midpoint
cAMP), and (B) a steep cAMP gradient (5000 pM/mm at
150 nM midpoint cAMP). Presented are images of typical
cells at different times after exposure of the cells to these
stimuli and the calculated Y of RBD-Raf–GFP at the
membrane (Y). See supplementary material Movies 1 and 2
for the original experiment. (C) A schematic of the
measurements in the cytoplasm and selected areas of the
boundary.

only lower, but also half-maximal levels are reached about
1 second later. Thus a cell at this position receives at the
upgradient side of the cell stronger and faster cAMP signals than
at the down-gradient side. The measured cAMP concentration was
used to calculate the local occupancy of the cAMP receptors with
the known affinity of the receptor (Postma and van Haastert, 2009).
All cells exposed to a steep cAMP gradient (5000 pM/mm at a
mean cAMP concentration of 150 nM) exhibit a strong and
synchronous response (Fig. 2; supplementary material Movie 2),
which allows detailed kinetic analysis of the translocation of
RBD-Raf–GFP from the cytoplasm to the membrane (Fig. 3).
Upon application of the cAMP gradient, RBD-Raf–GFP rapidly
depletes from the cytoplasm, followed by a return to the
cytoplasm around 15 seconds (Fig. 3A). In uniform cAMP,
RBD-Raf–GFP remains in the cytoplasm, but in a cAMP gradient
RBD-Raf–GFP returns to the membrane but only at the
upgradient side of the cell (Fig. 2; Fig. 3B). This shows that
Ras activation in cAMP gradients has three phases, which we
first will describe for cells exposed to a steep cAMP gradient,
inducing strong chemotaxis, and subsequently analyze in cells
exposed to different cAMP gradients.
Initial ‘uniform’ response – excitation and adaptation of
Ras activation

At about 6 seconds after application of a steep gradient of cAMP,
RBD-Raf–GFP exhibits maximal translocation from the
cytoplasm to the entire membrane in what appears a uniform
response (Fig. 2; Fig. 3A). However, detailed measurement of
the local levels of RBD-Raf–GFP at the membrane reveals a
gradient of RBD-Raf–GFP at the membrane that is similar to the
gradient of cAMP (Fig. 3E). Although these gradients are said to
be steep for chemotaxis (20% concentration difference across the
cell induces very strong chemotaxis), the differences in receptor
occupancy between upgradient and downgradient sides of the cell
are actually relatively small and the initial Ras activation exhibits
a similarly small difference across the cell (Fig. 3E). After the
initial translocation of RBD-Raf–GFP to the entire membrane,
RBD-Raf–GFP starts to dissociate from the membrane. This
dissociation is observed at the downgradient side of all cells; it
occurs with a half-time of 4–6 seconds (Fig. 3B), is completed
after ,30 seconds and never reoccurs in a stable cAMP gradient.
In contrast, at the upgradient side of the cells, the dissociation of

RBD-Raf–GFP from the membrane is followed by a return of
RBD-Raf–GFP at the membrane (Fig. 3B). The response is more
heterogeneous than at the downgradient side of the cell. In some
cells dissociation of RBD-Raf–GFP from the membrane is nearly
complete before it starts to return, whereas in other cells RBDRaf–GFP starts to return at the membrane sooner, long before
dissociation could be completed. The fraction of cells that exhibit
late reappearance of RBD-Raf–GFP at the membrane was used to
estimate the dissociation kinetics of RBD-Raf–GFP from the
membrane at the upgradient side of the cell, and this appeared to
be not statistically different from that at downgradient side of the
cell (downgradient half-time, 5.861.1 seconds; upgradient halftime, 5.561.3 seconds, n54 cells).
Symmetry breaking

As mentioned above, RBD-Raf–GFP starts to return to the
membrane at the upgradient side of the cell at ,12 to
24 seconds after application of the pipette. Interestingly, when
measured as the depletion of RBD-Raf–GFP from the cytoplasm,
this recovery of RBD-Raf–GFP from cytoplasm to the membrane
is completed after 30 seconds (Fig. 3B), but continues till
90 seconds when measured as the membrane level of RBD-Raf–
GFP at the front of the cell (Fig. 3C), suggesting that activation of
Ras at the leading edge is a complex process. Fig. 3D,F reveals
that, at 30 seconds after stimulation, Ras activation occurs at a
relatively large crescent of 15.661.4 mm, comprising ,40% of the
circumference of the cell. At 90 seconds after stimulation, the
crescent is much smaller (8.360.7 mm) with a concomitant
increase of the intensity at the utmost leading edge of the cell.
This suggests that gradient sensing comprises two processes:
symmetry braking to induce Ras activation at the upgradient half
of the cell, followed by confinement of activated Ras into a smaller
crescent. Fig. 3C reveals that, in steep gradients, Ras activation in
the upgradient half of the cell is ,10-fold larger than in the
downgradient half of the cell. This symmetry breaking starts at
,16 seconds after application of the cAMP gradient, reaches halfmaximal levels in ,6 seconds and is complete at 30 seconds after
stimulation (Fig. 3G).
Confinement

The confinement of Ras activation into a smaller crescent in steep
gradients is the slowest process. It starts at 20 seconds, has a half-time

4505

Journal of Cell Science

Symmetry breaking of Ras activation

Fig. 3. Phases of Ras activation. Cells expressing RBD-Raf–GFP and cytosolic RFP were exposed to uniform cAMP (1 mM cAMP), a steep cAMP gradient or a
shallow cAMP gradient as described in Fig. 2. (A) Kinetics of Ras-GTP activation presented as the depletion of RBD-Raf–GFP in the cytosol. (B) Kinetics of Ras-GTP
activation in the membrane (Y) at the utmost front and the rear of the cell (defined as a small area at the side of the cell closest to and furthest away from the pipette,
respectively) in a cAMP steep gradient. (C) Kinetics of Ras-GTP activation presented as the ratio of membrane bound RBD-Raf–GFP (Y) at the front half and rear half of
the cell. (D) Kinetics of confinement of the activated Ras crescent. Measured was the width of the crescent at half-maximal height (see E). The data shown in panels A–D
are the average of five cells. (E) The initial Ras activation at 6 seconds is directly proportional to the local activation of cAMP receptors. Left panel, Ras activation at
different distances from the front at 6 seconds after application of a steep gradient; the data are from a typical experiment. Right panel, cells were exposed to cAMP
gradients with different steepness and midpoint concentrations. We measured the local cAMP concentrations at the front and the rear of the cell using the dye Alexa;
we also measured RBD-Raf–GFP at the boundary of the cell (Y). Each data point is a different cell, except the data at cAMP51 (i.e. uniform cAMP), which is the
mean6s.d. of five cells. The linear regression curve gives a slope of 1.06, indicating that the front and rear gradient of initial Ras activation is directly proportional to the
front and rear gradient of receptor activation. (F) Ras activation at different distances from the front at 30 and 90 seconds after application of the steep gradient.
(G) Kinetics of Ras-GTP activation after application of uniform (green), a shallow (red) or steep gradient (blue) of cAMP. Presented are logarithmic transformations of
the data of panels A–D. The assumption is that adaptation, symmetry breaking and confinement are first order processes with rate constant k that start a specific time t0,
and thus follow the general equation ln(Yt/Yfinal)5k(t2t0), where Y is adaptation (decline of RBD-Raf–GFP at the membrane from A; k50.2 s21, t057 s), symmetry
breaking (front-half:rear-half ratio from C; k50.1 s21, t0516 s), or confinement (the width of the crescent from D; k50.03 s21, t0520 s).

of 24 seconds and reaches a final level at about 2 minutes after
stimulation (Fig. 3D,G). Between 30 and 90 seconds after
stimulation, the crescent decreases in length by 50%, and this is

accompanied by a ,2-fold increase of intensity of RBD-Raf–GFP at
the leading edge of the cell (Fig. 3F). Thus, the notion of constant
depletion levels of RBD-Raf–GFP in the cytoplasm while the

4506

Journal of Cell Science 126 (19)

intensity at the leading edge increases (Fig. 3B,C) is caused by
symmetry breaking to form a crescent of activated Ras and the
confinement of activated Ras into a smaller crescent.

Journal of Cell Science

Gradient-dependent activation of Ras

Supplementary material Movie 3 shows the localization of RBDRaf–GFP at the membrane before and after introduction of a
micropipette producing a shallow cAMP gradient (28 pM/mm at
a mean background concentration of 2.5 nM). Cells move
towards the pipette with a chemotaxis index of 0.5 (i.e. with a
small directional bias relative to the movement in buffer). The
localization of RBD-Raf–GFP in these cells suggests a series of
responses that is qualitatively similar to that in steep gradients,
but smaller in magnitude. Fig. 2B presents typical images of
RBD-Raf–GFP at the membrane in a shallow gradient. Upon
application of a shallow cAMP gradient, RBD-Raf–GFP
translocates from the cytoplasm to the boundary of the cell. As
in steep gradients, translocation is maximal at ,6 seconds and
recovers through adaptation. The kinetics of adaptation are
nearly identical in shallow and steep gradients (half-time
7.661.7 seconds and 5.761.1 seconds in shallow and steep
gradients, respectively; Fig. 3G). Following this activation and
deactivation of Ras, RBD-Raf–GFP at the membrane starts to
reappear at the upgradient half of the cell at a level that is about
5-fold to that at the downgradient half of the cell. This symmetry
breaking in a shallow cAMP gradient follows the same kinetics
as in a steep gradient and reaches a steady state at ,40 seconds
after application of the gradient (Fig. 3C,G). The spatial
activation of Ras is shown in Fig. 3D, revealing that RBD-Raf–
GFP is localized at the membrane in a wide crescent. In contrast
to a steep gradient, this large area of Ras activation does not
confine with time to a smaller crescent with higher intensity. In
summary, in a shallow cAMP gradient, initial activation and
adaptation, as well as symmetry breaking are smaller but follow
the same kinetics as in steep cAMP gradients. In contrast,
confinement of Ras activation, and its induced polarization, does
not occur in shallow cAMP gradients.
To determine the gradient-dependent activation of Ras, the
experiments were repeated with pipettes containing different
cAMP concentrations and cells were observed at different
distances from the pipette. This provides a series of
experimental conditions with gradients of different steepness of
cAMP concentration. The chemotaxis indexes (CIs) of cells in
these gradients are presented in Fig. 4D. To accommodate
intrinsic Ras symmetry breaking, as well as gradient-induced
symmetry breaking, we defined the front of the cell as the area
from which a pseudopod is extended. In all these experiments, we
observed no significant changes of RBD-Raf–GFP levels at the
membrane in the rear half of the cell, which is ,10% of the level
of RBD-Raf–GFP in the cytoplasm (Y50.1060.01).
In buffer, the front half of the cell contains ,3-fold more
activated Ras compared with that in the rear half of the cell
(Fig. 4A). cAMP gradients up to ,30 pM/mm induce only a
slight increase of activated Ras in the front half of the cell
compared with that of cells in buffer. Ras activation at the front
of the cell increases with increasing steepness of the gradient,
until the front half of the cell contains ,8-fold the amount of
activated Ras than the rear half of the cell. Data are best fitted
with a Hill plot that yields a Hill coefficient of n50.73, and the
gradient inducing half-maximal Ras activation (K0.5) at the front
was 220 pM/mm (Fig. 4A). Confinement of the crescent of

Fig. 4. Dose–response curves of Ras activation. Cells expressing RBDRaf–GFP and cytosolic RFP were exposed to cAMP gradients with different
steepness. The actual cAMP gradient was established using the dye Alexa that
was mixed with cAMP. Ras-GTP activation along the cell boundary (Y) was
measured as in Fig. 3F. These data were used to determine Ras activation in
the front half and rear half of the cell (A), in the utmost front area of the cell
(B), and the width of the activated Ras crescent at half-height (C). Data points
with error bars are derived from the experiments presented in Fig. 3, and are
the mean6s.d. of five cells; other data points are from single cells. (D) The
chemotaxis index of cells in these gradients.

Symmetry breaking of Ras activation
activated Ras upon longer exposure of cells to a cAMP gradient
does not occur in shallow gradients below ,50 pM/mm
(Fig. 4B). These data are also best fitted with a Hill plot that
yields a Hill coefficient of n50.75 and the K0.5 for the crescent
confinement was 890 pM/mm (Fig. 4B). The combination of
symmetry breaking and confinement of the crescent in steep
gradients leads to a ,5-fold increase of the intensity of RBDRaf–GFP at the utmost front of the cell (Fig. 4C). Owing to the
negative cooperativity (Hill coefficient ,1) and the differences
in K0.5 for symmetry breaking and confinement of the crescent,
this increase of Ras activation at the utmost front of the cell
occurs over four orders of magnitude of cAMP gradient
(Fig. 4C).

Journal of Cell Science

A predominant role for RasG in response to cAMP

Thus far, five Dictyostelium Ras proteins have been characterized
in detail, and they all appear to have important and distinct roles
in cell physiology; RasB is essential for cytokinesis, RasD
regulates phototaxis and thermotaxis of multicellular slugs, RasS
is important for the switch between eating and moving, and RasC
and RasG together regulate all cAMP-mediated signaling in early
development (Chubb et al., 2000; Chubb et al., 2002; Reymond
et al., 1984; Sutherland et al., 2001; Weeks, 2005; Wilkins et al.,
2000b). Although RasG is the predominant Ras protein detected
by our marker, the RBD domain of mammalian Raf also binds
with lower affinity to active RasC and probably all other
Dictyostelium Ras proteins (Kae et al., 2004; Sasaki and Firtel,
2009). We here have used our sensitive assay to determine the
specific contribution of RasC and RasG during the three cAMPmediated activation phases. Cells with a deletion of rasC have
only a slight defect in the uniform response and confinement, and
show almost normal Ras activation at the leading edge of cells
moving in a cAMP gradient (Fig. 5, Table 1). Several studies
have shown that disruption of both rasC and rasG results in
severe growth, developmental and chemotaxis defects (Bolourani
et al., 2006; Kortholt et al., 2011). In contrast, a recent study
showed that rasC/rasG double-null cells can undertake
chemotaxis in response to both folate and cAMP (Srinivasan
et al., 2013). Given that the cause of these conflicting data are
unknown, but might be due to compensation by other pathways
or upregulation of other Ras proteins, we instead used
cells expressing dominant-negative RasGS17N from a tightly
controlled doxycycline-inducible promoter (Veltman et al.,
2009b). Wild-type cells expressing RasGS17N have reduced
chemotaxis (CI50.6560,07) compared with that of wild-type

4507

cells (CI50.8860.10), exhibit a more than 50% reduction in the
uniform response, show strong defects in symmetry breaking, and
have no confinement. (Fig. 5, Table 1). Furthermore, rasC-null
cells expressing RasGS17N have strongly impaired chemotaxis
(CI50.2260.14), do not show a significant change in the
localization of RBD-Raf–GFP, neither to uniform cAMP nor in a
cAMP gradient (Fig. 5, Table 1; supplementary material Movie
4). Taken together, these results confirm previous genetic studies
(Bolourani et al., 2006), and show that RasG is the key Ras
protein in the regulation of cAMP mediated chemotaxis.
However, rasC-null cells expressing RasGS17N show a
strongly reduced, but significant, RBD-Raf–GFP translocation
in response to uniform folate (supplementary material Table S2),
suggesting that also other Ras proteins contribute to folate
chemotaxis.
Different roles of G-protein subunits

The cAMP receptor activates the heterotrimeric G-protein Ga2bc
(Jin et al., 2000; Xiao et al., 1997). Mutant cells with a deletion of
the single gb gene do not show any changes in the localization of
RBD-Raf–GFP, neither to uniform cAMP nor to a cAMP gradient
(Fig. 6A). Cells also do not exhibit chemotaxis, confirming that
Gbc is essential for chemotactic signal transduction (Sasaki et al.,
2004; Wu et al., 1995). Surprisingly, cells with a deletion of ga2 do
show a very significant translocation of RBD-Raf–GFP to the cell
boundary in response to uniform cAMP (Fig. 6A). Expression of
RasGS17N in ga2-null cells completely inhibits this RBD-Raf–
GFP response, indicating that the detected Ras activation in ga2null cells is completely dependent on RasG (Table 1). The RBDRaf–GFP response is less pronounced in ga2-null cells compared
with that in wild-type cells, and requires ,10-fold higher cAMP
concentrations (Fig. 6C). The rate of Ras activation is initially the
same in ga2-null and wild-type cells (Fig. 6B). However, in ga2null cells, Ras activation stops after 3.860.7 seconds, whereas in
wild-type cells activation continues until 6.060.9 seconds after
stimulation with uniform cAMP (means6s.d., n58).
As mentioned above for wild-type cells, a cAMP gradient
initially induces a ‘uniform’ transient translocation of RBD-Raf–
GFP to the cell boundary, which is followed by Ras activation at
the side of the cell facing the cAMP gradient (supplementary
material Movie 1). Also in ga2-null cells, the cAMP gradient
induces a short transient uniform Ras activation, but in contrast to
wild-type cells, the specific upgradient response never occurs
(Fig. 6A); in addition, ga2-null cells do not exhibit any
directional movement towards cAMP.

Fig. 5. Contribution of RasC and RasG. Wild-type and the
indicated Ras mutants expressing RBD-Raf–GFP and
cytosolic RFP were exposed to a steep cAMP gradient.
Images of typical cells after exposure to these stimuli.
(B) The calculated RBD-Raf–GFP at the membrane (Y). Ras
activation along the cell boundary (Y) was measured as in
Fig. 3F; data are the means of six cells and are presented as
degrees from the extending pseudopod.

4508

Journal of Cell Science 126 (19)
Table 1. Ras activation in mutants

Journal of Cell Science

Initial ‘uniform’ response
(% depletion in the cytoplasm)

Symmetry breaking
(upgradient: downgradient ratio)

Width of crescent (mm)

Cell

Mean

s.d.

Mean

s.d.

Mean

s.d.

WT
rasC-null
WT + RasGS17N
rasC-null + RasGS17N
gb-null
ga2-null
ga2-null + RasGS17N
WT + LatA
4-p-null
4-p-null +LatA
gc-null
myoII-null
myo-null + LatA
gefA-null
gefB-null
gefC-null
gefD-null
gefE-null
gefG-null
gefL-null
gefM-null
gefR-null
nfaA-null

32.0
21.7*
15.2*
2.8*a
2.6*a
17.7*b
1.2*a
31.0
33.0
34.1
28.6
33.0
35.7
27.5*
32.1
28.2
24.2*
38.1
35.5
34.5
23.1*
20.3*
31.4

3.0
8.4
5.4
4.7
1.8
6.8
5.6
6.6
4.6
4.6
5.8
5.2
2.3
3.6
6.0
2.9
2.6
5.6
2.8
4.9
7.6
4.7
5.5

8.73
4.39*
2.13*
1.05*c
0.95*c
1.08*c
ND
12.71*
6.86
8.42
8.68
7.72
8.12
4.03*
5.06*
2.97*
2.96*
3.90*
2.56*
7.55
2.98*
2.22*
3.40*

0.75
1.08
0.60
0.68
0.37
0.51

7.53
8.19
13.27*
ND
ND
ND
ND
13.68*
12.42*
12.07*
13.34*
12.47*
12.57*
10.52
8.76
8.47
13.26*
12.95*
6.91
7.88
6.90
7.94
13.03*

0.55
1.48
0.67

1.28
1.73
0.79
0.79
1.99
1.41
1.36
1.21
0.54
0.55
0.71
0.57
1.31
0.55
0.22
0.58

1.68
2.92
0.32
0.99
1.99
0.78
3.73
1.78
1.62
2.07
1.90
1.19
0.79
1.06
1.79
1.98

Cells expressing both RBD-Raf–GFP and cytosolic RFP were exposed to a cAMP gradient (5000 pM/mm, mean concentration 150 nM). The initial ‘uniform’
response is the fluorescence intensity of RBD-Raf-GFP in the cytoplasm at ,6 seconds after application of the cAMP gradient. RBD-Raf-GFP at the cell
boundary (Y) was calculated at 2 to 5 minutes after stimulation. Symmetry breaking is RBD-Raf-GFP at the cell boundary in the upgradient half of the cell
divided by that in the downgradient half of the cell. The crescent of RBD-Raf-GFP at the cell boundary has a bell-shaped form. The width of the crescent at halfmaximal height is presented. The data are the means and SD of eight wild-type or at least four mutant cells. WT, wild type; 4-p-null, cells with inhibition of four
signaling pathways mediated by sGC, PLA2, PI3K and TorC2, were generated as previously described (Kortholt et al., 2011); ND, not determined because no
crescent.
*P,0.01 compared with WT cells; a, not significantly different from 0; b, significantly different from 0; cnot significantly different from 1.0.

Vegetative Dictyostelium cells respond to the chemoattractant
folate, which activates many signaling pathways in a way that is
similar to their activation by cAMP in starved cells. Folate
chemotaxis requires activation of Ga4bc (Hadwiger et al., 1994)

and Ras at the leading edge (Lim et al., 2005). Whereas cells
lacking gb don’t show any folate stimulated Ras activation, ga4
(gpaD)-null cells still have a normal Ras response to uniform
folate. As observed for cAMP in ga2-null cells, cells lacking ga4

Fig. 6. Ras-GTP activation in Dictyostelium
signaling mutants. (A) Representative images of
RBD-Raf–GFP-expressing cells in buffer at 3–
6 seconds after addition of uniform cAMP, or in a
cAMP gradient. (B) The time course of
translocation after uniform stimulation with 1 mM
cAMP (means6s.e.m. of eight cells). (C) The
response at 3–6 seconds after addition of uniform
cAMP with different concentrations.

Symmetry breaking of Ras activation
don’t show the specific upgradient response or directional
movement in a folate gradient (Kataria et al., 2013).
These results indicate different roles for Gbc and Ga2 or Ga4
during chemotaxis. The experiments with wild-type, ga2-null and
ga4-null cells suggest that Gbc induces Ras activation, which is
completely transient, even in a cAMP or folate gradient. Ras
activation by uniform folate is about equal in wild-type and ga4null cells, suggesting that Ga4 provides little contribution to Ras
activation. However, a comparison of Ras activation by uniform
cAMP between wild-type and ga2-null cells suggests that Ga2
contributes to Ras activation by which the response to uniform
cAMP is prolonged. More importantly, in a cAMP or folate
gradient, Ga2 or Ga4 mediates symmetry breaking by which
Ras activation re-occurs at the side of the cell facing the
chemoattractant, and cells move towards cAMP or folate.

Journal of Cell Science

Role of GEFs and GAPs

The genome of Dictyostelium contains 25 genes encoding for
GEFs and 17 genes encoding for GAPs that potentially activate
and inactivate Ras, respectively. Many of these genes have been
inactivated by homologous recombination, without very severe
effects on chemotaxis (Kortholt and van Haastert, 2008; Weeks,
2005; Wilkins et al., 2005). We have used our sensitive assay to
measure Ras activation in nine mutants (Table 1). Recently, it
has been shown that the GAP NfA regulates RasG activity during
chemotaxis (Sasaki and Firtel, 2009); consistently nfaA-null cells
show strongly reduced symmetry breaking and lack confinement
(Table 1). The reduced symmetry breaking is the combined result
of reduced Ras activation at the upgradient half and increased
Ras activation at the downgradient half of the cell. All tested
GEF mutants, with the exception of gefL-null cells, exhibit
strongly reduced symmetry breaking, from ,8-fold in wild-type
cells to only ,3-fold in the mutants. In all GEF mutants, this
defect in symmetry breaking is caused by reduced Ras activation
at the upgradient half of the cell. It should be noted that
symmetry breaking is not absent in any mutant, suggesting that in
wild-type cells symmetry breaking is mediated by multiple Ras
GEFs.
The confinement of the crescent still occurs in mutants with a
deletion of gefB, gefC, gefG, gefL and gefM, but is essentially
absent in mutants lacking gefD and gefE. This suggests that a
specific subset of GEFs and GAPs might be involved in
restricting Ras activation to the utmost front of the cell. To
investigate the role of confinement of Ras activation in a small
crescent for cell shape, we have measured cell elongation defined
as the ratio of the length to the width of the cell. The results
(supplementary material Table S1; Fig. S2) indicate that there is
no correlation between cell elongation and the Ras responses. For
instance, gefD-null and gefE-null cells are both defective in
confinement, but the gefD-null mutant is more elongated whereas
gefE-null cells are far less elongated than wild-type cells.
The signaling pathways and cytoskeleton are important
for confinement

Previously, it has been shown that the formation of F-actin, and
the action of the four signaling enzymes PI3K, TorC2, PLA2 and
sGC, are not required for Ras activation by uniform cAMP or in a
cAMP gradient (Kortholt et al., 2011). These data were obtained
for Ras localization at the leading edge in a stable cAMP
gradient. Table 1 shows the data for the different phases of Ras
activation upon application of the pipette releasing cAMP for

4509

wild-type, cells with a deletion or inhibition of all four signaling
pathways, and myosin-null cells, all in the absence or presence of
the F-actin inhibitor LatA. All cell lines exhibit a similar
‘uniform’ translocation of RBD-Raf–GFP to the membrane at
,6 seconds after application of the pipette, the subsequent
dissociation of RBD-Raf–GFP from the membrane, and the
reappearance of RBD-Raf–GFP at the leading edge. Symmetry
breaking (the ratio of Ras activation in the upgradient half versus
the downgradient half of the cell) is essentially identical in all
these cell lines (Table 1). In contrast, the confinement of the
crescent of activated Ras that occurs in wild-type cells exposed to
steep gradients does not occur in cells with a deletion of the four
signaling pathways, deletion of myosin II, or depletion of F-actin
with LatA. Analysis of single pathway mutants show that cGMP
is essential for confinement (the crescent is 13.361.0 mm in gcnull cells), whereas phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-triphosphate
[PtdIns(3,4,5)P3], TorC2 and PLA2 play a minor role in
confinement (the crescent is 9.461.3 mm in wild-type cells in
the presence of 50 mM PI3K inhibitor LY, 9.761.3 mm in rip3null and pkbR1-null cells, and 7.962.1 mm in cells lacking pla2).
Discussion
With a sensitive assay to detect activated Ras at the plasma
membrane, we showed here that Dictyostelium cells exhibit
patches of activated Ras at the leading edge. Cells in buffer have
about 3-fold more active Ras in the front half of the cell than in
the rear half. This gradient of active Ras is also detectable in cells
lacking gbc or ga2, suggesting a mechanism of intrinsic
symmetry breaking (Sasaki et al., 2007; supplementary material
Fig. S1). An external gradient of chemoattractants further
activates Ras. With the more sensitive assay to detect active
Ras, we showed here that the chemotactic Ras activation consists
of three phases. The first phase consists of activation and
adaptation of the chemotactic machinery, and is essentially
identical in uniform cAMP and in a cAMP gradient. Application
of cAMP induces the translocation of RBD-Raf–GFP to the entire
membrane and the formation of F-actin at the entire cortex. In
both uniform cAMP and in a cAMP gradient, local Ras activation
is proportional to the local activation of the receptor. Therefore,
the initial Ras activation in a shallow gradient is only slightly
stronger at the front than at the rear of the cell. The initial
activation of Ras is transient; it is maximal after ,6 seconds and
declines with a half-life of ,4–6 seconds owing to adaptation.
This half-life is essentially identical in cells stimulated with
uniform cAMP or with a shallow or steep cAMP gradient, and
also identical at the front and the rear of the cell. Activation of
Ras requires surface receptors and Gbc, but surprisingly can
occur in the absence of Ga2. In wild-type cells, most of the Gbc
is released by cAMP from Ga2bc (Kumagai et al., 1989); in ga2null cells Gbc can be released from other cAMP-stimulated Gproteins, such as Ga1bc and Ga9bc (Bominaar and Van
Haastert, 1994; Brzostowski et al., 2002). Activation of Ras in
ga2-null cells is smaller in magnitude and requires higher cAMP
concentrations than in wild-type cells. Three non-exclusive
mechanisms might explain this reduced response: Ga2
contributes to Ras activation, as was suggested by the altered
kinetics in ga2-null cells, less Gbc is activated in ga2-null cells,
or mixtures of wild-type and ga2-null cells do not develop
completely normally. However, because cells lacking ga4 show a
similar Ras response to folate as ga2-null cells do to cAMP, the
later mechanism seems to be unlikely.

Journal of Cell Science

4510

Journal of Cell Science 126 (19)

The signaling enzymes PI3K, cGC, TorC2, and PLA2, as well
as the cytoskeleton components F-actin and myosin have little
effect on the initial activation and adaptation of Ras. In addition,
deletion of the individual GEFs does not have a very strong effect
on activation and adaptation, suggesting that multiple GEFs
contribute to Ras activation. Importantly, at the end of this initial
phase of Ras activation cells are in an adapted state.
After the initial transient activation, Ras becomes reactivated
exclusively at the upgradient side of the cell. The magnitude of
the response depends predominantly on the steepness of the
gradient. Thus, in uniform 100 nM cAMP no reactivation of Ras
is detectable, but strong activation of Ras is observed at the
leading edge in a gradient of 10 nM/mm at a mean concentration
of 100 nM cAMP. This symmetry breaking of Ras activation
absolutely requires the presence of Ga2; in ga2-null cells a
cAMP gradient induces the initial ‘uniform’ Ras response but not
Ras activation at the leading edge and no chemotaxis. The
signaling enzymes PI3K, sGC, TorC2 and PLA2 do not
contribute to symmetry breaking of Ras activation in a cAMP
gradient, neither does F-actin or myosin. The experiments
suggest that symmetry breaking is mediated by Ga2. Since
uniform cAMP induces stronger Ras activation in wild-type cells
than in ga2-null cells, we propose that Ga2 contributes to Ras
activation, presumably by activating additional GEFs or locally
inhibiting GAPs. Dictyostelium contains 25 GEFs. Deletion
experiments of nine GEFs reveal that in eight mutants symmetry
breaking is strongly reduced, but not absent. These data suggests
that multiple GEFs contribute to symmetry breaking.
During symmetry breaking, the downgradient half of the cell
remains subject to adaptation, whereas Ras activation occurs in a
relatively large crescent at the upgradient half of the cell. This
crescent of membrane bound RBD-Raf–GFP has the highest
intensity at the leading edge and gradually declines further away
from the front as a bell-shaped curve with a width at half-height
of ,15 mm. In wild-type cells, the crescent of activated Ras
becomes more confined to the utmost leading edge, which is the
third phase of Ras activation during chemotaxis. Confinement
occurs without a change in the total amount of activated Ras, as
indicated by the constant amount of RBD-Raf–GFP in the
cytoplasm or at the entire boundary of the cell. The initial wide
bell-shaped curve of membrane-bound RBD-Raf–GFP becomes
very narrow, with very steep flanks. This suggests that during
confinement of the crescent RBD-Raf–GFP dissociates from the
ends of the crescent and binds to the utmost front. The local
amount of active Ras-GTP depends on the local activity of GEFs
and GAPs. The experiments suggest that during initial symmetry
breaking, long-range gradients of GEFs at the front and GAPs at
the rear lead to the large crescent of active Ras. During
subsequent confinement a sharp spatial transition between
active and inactive Ras is induced, suggesting that at the
utmost front active Ras induces more GEF activity, whereas
further away from the front GAPs are activated, leading to
inactivation of Ras. Confinement of Ras activation to the leading
edge requires F-actin and myosin, and the signaling molecules
that regulate myosin, notably cGMP in Dictyostelium. An
attractive model is that myosin filaments that accumulate at the
side and rear of the cell during chemotaxis activate or recruit
GAPs, whereas actin filaments that accumulate in the front
activate or recruit GEFs. Confinement of Ras activation is normal
in mutants with a deletion of gefB, gefC, gefG, gefL, gefM and
gefR, but is absent in mutants lacking gefD and gefE, and nfaA.

Interestingly, GefD contains a putative RhoGAP domain,
suggesting a direct link with the actin cytoskeleton (Wilkins
et al., 2005).
Expression of dominant negative RasGS17N in rasC-null cells
results in a strongly reduced, but significant RBD-Raf–GFP
translocation in response to uniform folate. This suggests that in
addition to RasC and RasG, other Ras proteins contribute to
folate signaling. By contrast, the current and previous
experiments show that either RasC or RasG is necessary for the
transduction of the cAMP signal and that RasG is the major Ras
protein regulating cAMP-mediated symmetry breaking and
confinement (Bolourani et al., 2006; Kortholt et al., 2011;
Sasaki et al., 2004). Consistently, the strongest defects in
symmetry breaking were observed for cells lacking nfaA and
gefR, the only RasG-specific GAP and GEF, respectively,
reported so far (Kae et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2008). Much
smaller defects in the chemotactic response were observed in
cells lacking the RasC-specific gefA (Kae et al., 2007). However,
the deletion experiments also show that activation, symmetry
breaking and confinement use a multitude of Ras-GEFs, which
are probably not all directly regulating RasG activity (Kae et al.,
2007). Furthermore, during confinement the amplification
pathways and cell cortex provide feedback regulation on Ras
activity. This suggests that also other Ras proteins, activated
downstream of RasG, can contribute to chemotaxis. Consistent
with such a model, RapA is activated in a RasG-dependent
manner, GefQ activates RasB in an actin-dependent manner, and
both RasB and RapA are important for myosin II disassembly at
the front of chemotaxing cells (Jeon et al., 2007; Mondal et al.,
2008).
The combination of symmetry breaking and confinement leads
to strong Ras activation at the leading edge. The ratio of active
Ras at the front relative to the rear is ,10:1 in a steep gradient,
where the ratio of receptor occupancy is only ,1.2:1, indicating
that there is a strong spatial amplification of the cAMP signal.
Interestingly, in shallow gradients (,30 pM/mm) very little
amplification of the cAMP gradient is detectable at the level of
Ras activation.
From movement in buffer to chemotaxis in shallow and
steep gradients

In the absence of chemotactic signals, cells do not move in
random directions, but exhibit a persistent random walk (Van
Haastert and Bosgraaf, 2009). Cells have a high probability of
extending a new pseudopod from the same Ras-activated area of
the cell and in the same direction as the current pseudopod. This
intrinsic pathway for symmetry breaking is independent of
receptor or heterotrimeric G-protein signaling. At the lower limit
of chemotaxis (,2 pM/mm), the very shallow gradient activates a
few additional Ras molecules at the high-gradient side of the cell,
which might induce a small gradient-oriented bias of the intrinsic
Ras asymmetry thereby changing the probability of where actin
polymerization occurs and a pseudopod is made. Somewhat
steeper gradients (,100 pM/mm) induce more Ras-GTP
molecules and therefore a stronger directional bias. Much
steeper gradients (,2000 pM/mm) also induce amplification of
Ras activation, providing full activation of Ras in the utmost
leading edge of the cell. In these cells all pseudopods are formed
in the direction of the steep gradient.
This cAMP gradient dose-dependent activation of Ras is
similar in wild-type cells and in mutant cells lacking four

Journal of Cell Science

Symmetry breaking of Ras activation
signaling enzymes (PI3K, TorC2, PLA2 and sGC) (Kortholt et al.,
2011). Interestingly, these mutant cells can chemotax only in steep
gradients with strong activation of Ras at the leading edge. Thus,
the basal chemotaxis system, composed of cAMP receptors,
Ga2bc, RasC/G and Rac/actin, is sufficient for chemotaxis, but is
relatively insensitive. The few molecules of Ras that are activated
by the shallow gradient require the signaling enzymes PI3K,
TorC2, PLA2 and sGC to induce a stronger directional bias.
Previous experiments (Bosgraaf and Van Haastert, 2009) have
shown that the signaling enzyme PLA2 and cGMP function in the
memory of direction. Wild-type cells in buffer have the strong
tendency to persist in their direction of movement, which is due to
the alternating left–right extension of pseudopods at a small angle.
The persistence of direction has a time constant of ,3 minutes,
equivalent to ,10 pseudopods. In the absence of PLA2 and cGMP
each new pseudopod is extended in a random direction. Thus, in
wild-type cells, the small directional bias that is imposed by the
shallow gradient slowly accumulates at each new pseudopod
owing to the persistence memory of PLA2 and cGMP. The other
signaling molecules and enzymes [PtdIns(3,4,5)P3, TorCs and
sGC] are formed at or localized to the place where Ras was
activated. They enhance Ras-induced Rac activation and/or
formation of F-actin at the leading edge. In the concept from
physics, these signaling pathways enhance the signal-to-noise
ratio, because they function as time-averaging and memory
devices (PLA2 and cGMP), and as amplifier of spatial
information [PtdIns(3,4,5)P3, TorCs and sGC]. Taken together,
these signaling pathways allow chemotaxis to occur in cAMP
gradients that are ,100-fold more shallow (Fig. 4D).
Conclusions

These experiments provide a conceptual framework of gradient
sensing and chemotaxis. A cAMP gradient induces the activation
of the G-protein Ga2bc. The Gbc subunit induces the uniform
activation and adaptation of Ras. The Ga2 subunit is essential to
activate Ras at the side of the cell facing the highest
concentration of cAMP. Local and global activities of specific
GEFs and GAPs lead to Ras activation in a large area at the front
of the cell. As cells start to move in the direction of the cAMP
gradient, the rearranged cytoskeleton locally activates additional
GEFs and GAPs to confine Ras activation to the utmost leading
edge, thereby inducing polarized cells that move persistently
towards cAMP. Downstream signaling molecules contribute to
chemotaxis as memory of direction and amplifiers of spatial
information.
Materials and Methods
Cell culture and preparation

The strains used are wild-type AX3, rasC-null (Bolourani et al., 2006), gb-null
(Wu et al., 1995), ga2-null (Kumagai et al., 1991), gc-null (Veltman and van
Haastert, 2008), myoII-null (Yumura et al., 2005), gefA-null (Insall et al., 1996),
gefB-null (Wilkins et al., 2000a), gefC-null, gefD-null, gefE-null, gefG-null, gefLnull (Wilkins et al., 2005), gefM-null (Arigoni et al., 2005), gefR-null (Kae et al.,
2007) and nfaA-null (Zhang et al., 2008). RasG activation was inhibited by
expressing dominant-negative RasGS17N from the previously described
doxycycline-inducible vector pDM310 (Veltman et al., 2009b). Expression of
RasGS17N from this dox-on system was induced by growing the cells for at least
24 hours in the presence of 10 mM doxycline. To determine the contribution of the
signaling molecules, we used deletion mutants in specific genes in combination
with drugs to inhibit one or a combination of sGC, PLA2, PI3K and TorC2 as
previously described (Kortholt et al., 2011). Actin polymerization was inhibited
with 5 mM Latrunculin A (LatA).
To study Ras activation, RBD-Raf–GFP (amino acids 50–134 of RAF1) was coexpressed with cytosolic mRFP from a modified pDM318 vector (Veltman et al.,
2009a) in which the neomycin cassette was replaced by hygromycin. F-actin

4511

formation was visualized by expressing LimEDcoil–GFP (amino acids 1–145 of
LimE) from the previously published LB15B plasmid (Kortholt et al., 2011). Cells
were grown in HL5-C medium including glucose (ForMedium) containing 50 mg/
ml Hygromycin B (Invitrogen) for selection.
We have taken precautions to obtain mutant cells that exhibit optimal chemotaxis
towards cAMP. Many Dictyostelium mutants with deletion of cAMP receptors, Gproteins or signaling enzymes do not acquire good chemotactic responsiveness to
cAMP owing to impaired development and reduced expression of other signaling
proteins. Development can be improved considerably by exogenous pulsing with
cAMP or starving mutants in the presence of wild-type cells (Kortholt et al., 2011).
Unlabeled wild-type cells were mixed with equal amounts of mutant cells expressing
GFP- or RFP-tagged proteins, and starved on agar for 5 to 7 hours until streams were
formed. Cells were then harvested, suspended in 10 mM KH2PO4/Na2HPO4, pH 6.5
(PB), and used in chemotaxis experiments.
Chemotaxis assays

To investigate how Ras is locally activated during chemotaxis, cells expressing
RBD-Raf–GFP and RFP were stimulated with a micropipette releasing cAMP
(Fig. 2). Cells were harvested in PB and incubated on a glass support at a density
of ,46104 cells/cm2. The distance between adjacent cells is ,5 cell lengths, so
that cells do not form streams, and chemotaxis can be measured in the absence of
strong interactions between mutant and wild-type cells. Chemotaxis was observed
using a confocal fluorescent microscope, detecting wild-type and mutant cells in
the phase contrast and fluorescent channel, respectively. Control experiments
using the fluorescent dye Alexa Fluor 594 in the pipette, and diffusion theory,
reveal that at a distance of 50 mm from the pipette the spatial gradient is stable at 5
to 10 seconds after application of the pipette (Postma and van Haastert, 2009).
Using pipettes with different cAMP concentrations and recordings at different
distances from the pipette, cells are exposed to shallow or steep cAMP gradients
(in pM/mm) at defined mean background cAMP concentrations (in nM). Confocal
images were recorded using a Zeiss LSM 510 META-NLO confocal laser scanning
microscope equipped with a Zeiss plan-apochromatic 636 NA 1.4 objective.
A sensitive assay for Ras activation at the cell boundary

In Dictyostelium, Ras proteins are present at the plasma membrane. Stimulation of
cells with cAMP does not change the localization of Ras, but converts Ras from the
inactive Ras-GDP state into active Ras-GTP. The RBD domain of mammalian Raf
binds specifically to the GTP-form of Ras, mainly RasG. Upon cAMP stimulation,
RBD-Raf–GFP translocates from the cytoplasm to the cell boundary (Fig. 2). The
RBD-Raf–GFP response to cAMP is easy detectable, very reproducible and robust.
However, assays measuring the activation of a membrane protein using the
translocation of a cytosolic marker to the cell boundary are fundamentally
insensitive. Assume a cell with no Ras activation and a fluorescence intensity of
RBD-Raf–GFP in the cytosol equal to 100. The boundary pixels are on average halffilled with cytoplasm and have an intensity of 50. When a weak cAMP signal
induces a small level of activation of Ras so that ,10% of cytosolic RBD-Raf–GFP
translocates from the cytoplasm to the membrane, the intensity in the cytosol
decreases to ,90, whereas the intensity in the boundary pixel increases to only 60–
70%, which is still below the fluorescent intensity of the adjacent cytosolic pixel.
Previously, we have demonstrated for a PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 marker that such small
translocations can be easily measured by co-expressing the GFP detector together
with cytosolic RFP (Bosgraaf et al., 2008). Here, we co-expressed RBD-Raf–GFP
and cytosolic RFP from one plasmid. The RBD-Raf–GFP minus the RFP signal in
the boundary pixels represents Y, the amount of RBD-Raf–GFP that specifically
binds to Ras-GTP at the membrane.
For calculations we used the following steps. First, the mean background
fluorescence intensity in the red and green channels outside the cells is determined
and subtracted from all pixels of the movie. Then individual cells are analyzed. To
correct for the difference in expression levels of the two markers within one cell,
large areas of the cytoplasm are selected (excluding nucleus and vacuoles),
yielding the mean average fluorescent intensity in the cytoplasm of the red channel
,Rc. and green channel ,Gc., respectively. This provides the correction factor
c5,Gc./,Rc., and all pixels in the red channel are multiplied by c. Then for
each pixel (i) of that cell we calculated the difference of green and corrected red
signal, and this is normalized by dividing by the average fluorescent intensity of
GFP in the cytoplasm. Thus, Y(i)5(Gi2cRi)/,Gc.. Previous analysis with a
PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 detector (Bosgraaf et al., 2008) and current analysis with the RasGTP detector (Fig. 2) reveal that this method provides a ,10-fold increase of
sensitivity to detect local activated Ras. It should be noted that a value of Y50.4 is
highly significant and easily detectable using the information from the green and
red channels, but is undetectable as an increase RBD-Raf–GFP at the cell boundary
in the green channel only. Thus, all experiments yielding values of Y between 0
and ,0.5 yield new information on Ras activation not presented previously.

Acknowledgements

We want to thank Dr R. A. Firtel, Dr G. Weeks and the Dictyostelium
stock center for providing the mutant strains used in this study.

4512

Journal of Cell Science 126 (19)

Author contributions

A.K. and P.J.M.v.H. designed the experiments and wrote the paper.
I.K.G. and R.K. performed the experiments.
Funding

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in
the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Supplementary material available online at
http://jcs.biologists.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1242/jcs.132340/-/DC1

Journal of Cell Science

References
Ambrosi, D., Gamba, A. and Serini, G. (2004). Cell directional and chemotaxis in
vascular morphogenesis. Bull. Math. Biol. 66, 1851-1873.
Arigoni, M., Bracco, E., Lusche, D. F., Kae, H., Weeks, G. and Bozzaro, S. (2005). A
novel Dictyostelium RasGEF required for chemotaxis and development. BMC Cell
Biol. 6, 43.
Bolourani, P., Spiegelman, G. B. and Weeks, G. (2006). Delineation of the roles
played by RasG and RasC in cAMP-dependent signal transduction during the early
development of Dictyostelium discoideum. Mol. Biol. Cell 17, 4543-4550.
Bominaar, A. A. and Van Haastert, P. J. (1994). Phospholipase C in Dictyostelium
discoideum. Identification of stimulatory and inhibitory surface receptors and Gproteins. Biochem. J. 297, 189-193.
Bosgraaf, L. and Van Haastert, P. J. (2009). Navigation of chemotactic cells by
parallel signaling to pseudopod persistence and orientation. PLoS ONE 4, e6842.
Bosgraaf, L., Keizer-Gunnink, I. and Van Haastert, P. J. (2008). PI3-kinase signaling
contributes to orientation in shallow gradients and enhances speed in steep
chemoattractant gradients. J. Cell Sci. 121, 3589-3597.
Bourne, H. R., Sanders, D. A. and McCormick, F. (1991). The GTPase superfamily:
conserved structure and molecular mechanism. Nature 349, 117-127.
Brzostowski, J. A., Johnson, C. and Kimmel, A. R. (2002). Galpha-mediated
inhibition of developmental signal response. Curr. Biol. 12, 1199-1208.
Causin, P. and Facchetti, G. (2009). Autocatalytic loop, amplification and diffusion: a
mathematical and computational model of cell polarization in neural chemotaxis.
PLOS Comput. Biol. 5, e1000479.
Charest, P. G. and Firtel, R. A. (2007). Big roles for small GTPases in the control of
directed cell movement. Biochem. J. 401, 377-390.
Charest, P. G., Shen, Z., Lakoduk, A., Sasaki, A. T., Briggs, S. P. and Firtel, R. A.
(2010). A Ras signaling complex controls the RasC-TORC2 pathway and directed cell
migration. Dev. Cell 18, 737-749.
Chen, L., Iijima, M., Tang, M., Landree, M. A., Huang, Y. E., Xiong, Y., Iglesias,
P. A. and Devreotes, P. N. (2007). PLA2 and PI3K/PTEN pathways act in parallel to
mediate chemotaxis. Dev. Cell 12, 603-614.
Chubb, J. R., Wilkins, A., Thomas, G. M. and Insall, R. H. (2000). The Dictyostelium
RasS protein is required for macropinocytosis, phagocytosis and the control of cell
movement. J. Cell Sci. 113, 709-719.
Chubb, J. R., Wilkins, A., Wessels, D. J., Soll, D. R. and Insall, R. H. (2002).
Pseudopodium dynamics and rapid cell movement in Dictyostelium Ras pathway
mutants. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 53, 150-162.
Elzie, C. A., Colby, J., Sammons, M. A. and Janetopoulos, C. (2009). Dynamic
localization of G proteins in Dictyostelium discoideum. J. Cell Sci. 122, 2597-2603.
Hadwiger, J. A., Lee, S. and Firtel, R. A. (1994). The G alpha subunit G alpha 4
couples to pterin receptors and identifies a signaling pathway that is essential for
multicellular development in Dictyostelium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 1056610570.
Hoeller, O. and Kay, R. R. (2007). Chemotaxis in the absence of PIP3 gradients. Curr.
Biol. 17, 813-817.
Insall, R. H., Borleis, J. and Devreotes, P. N. (1996). The aimless RasGEF is required
for processing of chemotactic signals through G-protein-coupled receptors in
Dictyostelium. Curr. Biol. 6, 719-729.
Jeon, T. J., Lee, D. J., Merlot, S., Weeks, G. and Firtel, R. A. (2007). Rap1 controls
cell adhesion and cell motility through the regulation of myosin II. J. Cell Biol. 176,
1021-1033.
Jin, T., Zhang, N., Long, Y., Parent, C. A. and Devreotes, P. N. (2000). Localization
of the G protein betagamma complex in living cells during chemotaxis. Science 287,
1034-1036.
Kae, H., Lim, C. J., Spiegelman, G. B. and Weeks, G. (2004). Chemoattractantinduced Ras activation during Dictyostelium aggregation. EMBO Rep. 5, 602-606.
Kae, H., Kortholt, A., Rehmann, H., Insall, R. H., Van Haastert, P. J., Spiegelman,
G. B. and Weeks, G. (2007). Cyclic AMP signalling in Dictyostelium: G-proteins
activate separate Ras pathways using specific RasGEFs. EMBO Rep. 8, 477-482.
Kamimura, Y., Xiong, Y., Iglesias, P. A., Hoeller, O., Bolourani, P. and Devreotes,
P. N. (2008). PIP3-independent activation of TorC2 and PKB at the cell’s leading
edge mediates chemotaxis. Curr. Biol. 18, 1034-1043.
Kataria, R., Xu, X., Fusetti, F., Keizer-Gunnink, I., Jin, T., van Haastert, P. J. and
Kortholt, A. (2013). Dictyostelium Ric8 is a nonreceptor guanine exchange factor for
heterotrimeric G proteins and is important for development and chemotaxis. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 6424-6429.
Kortholt, A. and van Haastert, P. J. (2008). Highlighting the role of Ras and Rap
during Dictyostelium chemotaxis. Cell. Signal. 20, 1415-1422.

Kortholt, A., Kataria, R., Keizer-Gunnink, I., Van Egmond, W. N., Khanna, A. and
Van Haastert, P. J. (2011). Dictyostelium chemotaxis: essential Ras activation and
accessory signalling pathways for amplification. EMBO Rep. 12, 1273-1279.
Kumagai, A., Pupillo, M., Gundersen, R., Miake-Lye, R., Devreotes, P. N. and
Firtel, R. A. (1989). Regulation and function of G alpha protein subunits in
Dictyostelium. Cell 57, 265-275.
Kumagai, A., Hadwiger, J. A., Pupillo, M. and Firtel, R. A. (1991). Molecular genetic
analysis of two G alpha protein subunits in Dictyostelium. J. Biol. Chem. 266, 12201228.
Liao, X. H., Buggey, J. and Kimmel, A. R. (2010). Chemotactic activation of
Dictyostelium AGC-family kinases AKT and PKBR1 requires separate but
coordinated functions of PDK1 and TORC2. J. Cell Sci. 123, 983-992.
Lim, C. J., Spiegelman, G. B. and Weeks, G. (2001). RasC is required for optimal
activation of adenylyl cyclase and Akt/PKB during aggregation. EMBO J. 20, 44904499.
Lim, C. J., Zawadzki, K. A., Khosla, M., Secko, D. M., Spiegelman, G. B. and
Weeks, G. (2005). Loss of the Dictyostelium RasC protein alters vegetative cell size,
motility and endocytosis. Exp. Cell Res. 306, 47-55.
Mato, J. M., Losada, A., Nanjundiah, V. and Konijn, T. M. (1975). Signal input for a
chemotactic response in the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 72, 4991-4993.
Mondal, S., Bakthavatsalam, D., Steimle, P., Gassen, B., Rivero, F. and Noegel,
A. A. (2008). Linking Ras to myosin function: RasGEF Q, a Dictyostelium exchange
factor for RasB, affects myosin II functions. J. Cell Biol. 181, 747-760.
Postma, M. and van Haastert, P. J. (2009). Mathematics of experimentally generated
chemoattractant gradients. Methods Mol. Biol. 571, 473-488.
Reymond, C. D., Gomer, R. H., Mehdy, M. C. and Firtel, R. A. (1984).
Developmental regulation of a Dictyostelium gene encoding a protein homologous
to mammalian ras protein. Cell 39, 141-148.
Rivero, F. and Somesh, B. P. (2002). Signal transduction pathways regulated by Rho
GTPases in Dictyostelium. J. Muscle Res. Cell Motil. 23, 737-749.
Sasaki, A. T. and Firtel, R. A. (2006). Regulation of chemotaxis by the orchestrated
activation of Ras, PI3K, and TOR. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 85, 873-895.
Sasaki, A. T. and Firtel, R. A. (2009). Spatiotemporal regulation of Ras-GTPases
during chemotaxis. Methods Mol. Biol. 571, 333-348.
Sasaki, A. T., Chun, C., Takeda, K. and Firtel, R. A. (2004). Localized Ras signaling
at the leading edge regulates PI3K, cell polarity, and directional cell movement.
J. Cell Biol. 167, 505-518.
Sasaki, A. T., Janetopoulos, C., Lee, S., Charest, P. G., Takeda, K., Sundheimer,
L. W., Meili, R., Devreotes, P. N. and Firtel, R. A. (2007). G proteinindependent Ras/PI3K/F-actin circuit regulates basic cell motility. J. Cell Biol.
178, 185-191.
Srinivasan, K., Wright, G. A., Hames, N., Housman, M., Roberts, A., Aufderheide,
K. J. and Janetopoulos, C. (2013). Delineating the core regulatory elements crucial
for directed cell migration by examining folic-acid-mediated responses. J. Cell Sci.
126, 221-233.
Sutherland, B. W., Spiegelman, G. B. and Weeks, G. (2001). A Ras subfamily GTPase
shows cell cycle-dependent nuclear localization. EMBO Rep. 2, 1024-1028.
Swaney, K. F., Huang, C. H. and Devreotes, P. N. (2010). Eukaryotic chemotaxis: a
network of signaling pathways controls motility, directional sensing, and polarity.
Annu. Rev. Biophys 39, 265-289.
Tranquillo, R. T., Lauffenburger, D. A. and Zigmond, S. H. (1988). A stochastic
model for leukocyte random motility and chemotaxis based on receptor binding
fluctuations. J. Cell Biol. 106, 303-309.
Tuxworth, R. I., Cheetham, J. L., Machesky, L. M., Spiegelmann, G. B., Weeks,
G. and Insall, R. H. (1997). Dictyostelium RasG is required for normal motility and
cytokinesis, but not growth. J. Cell Biol. 138, 605-614.
Ueda, M. and Shibata, T. (2007). Stochastic signal processing and transduction in
chemotactic response of eukaryotic cells. Biophys. J. 93, 11-20.
Van Haastert, P. J. and Bosgraaf, L. (2009). Food searching strategy of amoeboid cells
by starvation induced run length extension. PLoS ONE 4, e6814.
van Haastert, P. J. and Postma, M. (2007). Biased random walk by stochastic
fluctuations of chemoattractant-receptor interactions at the lower limit of detection.
Biophys. J. 93, 1787-1796.
Veltman, D. M. and van Haastert, P. J. (2008). The role of cGMP and the rear of the
cell in Dictyostelium chemotaxis and cell streaming. J. Cell Sci. 121, 120-127.
Veltman, D. M., Keizer-Gunnik, I. and Van Haastert, P. J. (2008). Four key signaling
pathways mediating chemotaxis in Dictyostelium discoideum. J. Cell Biol. 180, 747753.
Veltman, D. M., Akar, G., Bosgraaf, L. and Van Haastert, P. J. (2009a). A new set of
small, extrachromosomal expression vectors for Dictyostelium discoideum. Plasmid
61, 110-118.
Veltman, D. M., Keizer-Gunnink, I. and Haastert, P. J. (2009b). An extrachromosomal,
inducible expression system for Dictyostelium discoideum. Plasmid 61, 119-125.
Vetter, I. R. and Wittinghofer, A. (2001). The guanine nucleotide-binding switch in
three dimensions. Science 294, 1299-1304.
Weeks, G. (2005). The small GTPase superfamily. In Dictyostelium Genomics (ed.
Wiliam F. Loomis and Adam Kuspa), pp. 173-210. Horizon Bioscience.
Wilkins, A., Chubb, J. R. and Insall, R. H. (2000a). A novel Dictyostelium RasGEF is
required for normal endocytosis, cell motility and multicellular development. Curr.
Biol. 10, 1427-1437.

Symmetry breaking of Ras activation

Journal of Cell Science

Wilkins, A., Khosla, M., Fraser, D. J., Spiegelman, G. B., Fisher, P. R., Weeks,
G. and Insall, R. H. (2000b). Dictyostelium RasD is required for normal phototaxis,
but not differentiation. Genes Dev. 14, 1407-1413.
Wilkins, A., Szafranski, K., Fraser, D. J., Bakthavatsalam, D., Müller, R., Fisher, P. R.,
Glöckner, G., Eichinger, L., Noegel, A. A. and Insall, R. H. (2005). The Dictyostelium
genome encodes numerous RasGEFs with multiple biological roles. Genome Biol. 6, R68.
Wu, L. J., Valkema, R., Van Haastert, P. J. M. and Devreotes, P. N. (1995). The G
protein beta subunit is essential for multiple responses to chemoattractants in
Dictyostelium. J. Cell Biol. 129, 1667-1675.

4513

Xiao, Z., Zhang, N., Murphy, D. B. and Devreotes, P. N. (1997). Dynamic distribution
of chemoattractant receptors in living cells during chemotaxis and persistent
stimulation. J. Cell Biol. 139, 365-374.
Yumura, S., Yoshida, M., Betapudi, V., Licate, L. S., Iwadate, Y., Nagasaki, A.,
Uyeda, T. Q. and Egelhoff, T. T. (2005). Multiple myosin II heavy chain kinases:
roles in filament assembly control and proper cytokinesis in Dictyostelium. Mol. Biol.
Cell 16, 4256-4266.
Zhang, S., Charest, P. G. and Firtel, R. A. (2008). Spatiotemporal regulation of Ras
activity provides directional sensing. Curr. Biol. 18, 1587-1593.

