50

Biophysical Journal

Volume 82

January 2002

50 – 63

Models of Eukaryotic Gradient Sensing: Application to Chemotaxis of
Amoebae and Neutrophils
Andre Levchenko* and Pablo A. Iglesias†
*Divisions of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125 and †Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 105 Barton Hall, Baltimore, Maryland 21218 USA

ABSTRACT Eukaryotic cells can detect shallow gradients of chemoattractants with exquisite precision and respond quickly
to changes in the gradient steepness and direction. Here, we describe a set of models explaining both adaptation to uniform
increases in chemoattractant and persistent signaling in response to gradients. We demonstrate that one of these models can
be mapped directly onto the biochemical signal-transduction pathways underlying gradient sensing in amoebae and
neutrophils. According to this scheme, a locally acting activator (PI3-kinase) and a globally acting inactivator (PTEN or a
similar phosphatase) are coordinately controlled by the G-protein activation. This signaling system adapts perfectly to
spatially homogeneous changes in the chemoattractant. In chemoattractant gradients, an imbalance between the action of
the activator and the inactivator results in a spatially oriented persistent signaling, amplified by a substrate supply-based
positive feedback acting through small G-proteins. The amplification is activated only in a continuous presence of the external
signal gradient, thus providing the mechanism for sensitivity to gradient alterations. Finally, based on this mapping, we make
predictions concerning the dynamics of signaling. We propose that the underlying principles of perfect adaptation and
substrate supply-based positive feedback will be found in the sensory systems of other chemotactic cell types.

INTRODUCTION
Many biological systems have the ability to sense the direction of external chemical sources and respond by polarizing and migrating toward chemoattractants or away from
chemorepellants. This phenomenon, referred to as chemotaxis, is crucial for proper functioning of single-cell organisms, such as bacteria and amoebae, and multi-cellular
systems as complex as the immune and nervous systems.
Chemotaxis also appears to be important in wound healing
and tumor metastasis. A common feature of most chemotactic signaling systems is the ability to adapt to different
levels of external stimuli, so that it is the gradient of
signaling molecule rather than the average signal value that
determines the response. Chemotactic cells exhibiting perfect adaptation respond to spatially homogeneous increases
in external stimulus by transient activation of specific intracellular signaling pathways. The same signaling pathways, however, can be activated persistently if the signal is
presented in a spatially inhomogeneous, graded manner.
The goal of this analysis is to extend our understanding of
these processes by creating a single model explaining both
adaptation and gradient sensing.
The need for chemotaxis presents cells with a daunting
problem of detecting often exceedingly shallow and changing gradients of extracellular substances and regulating a

Received for publication 23 April 2001 and in final form 11 October 2001.
Dr. Levchenko’s present address is Dept. of Biomedical Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218.
Address reprint requests to Pablo Iglesias, Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 105 Barton Hall, 3400 N.
Charles St., Baltimore, MD 21218. Tel.: 410-516-6026; Fax: 410-5165566; E-mail pi@jhu.edu.
© 2002 by the Biophysical Society
0006-3495/02/01/50/14 $2.00

complex locomotion apparatus to move in accordance with
the direction and the value of these gradients. The mechanism for attaining a highly complex and integrated response
such as this calls for an explanation and modeling in quantitative rather than qualitative terms. Mathematical and
computational modeling can provide a translation of seemingly logical biochemically-based arguments into a set of
predictions of dynamical and steady-state properties of the
system. Using mathematical formalism, alternative hypotheses can be contrasted more easily and criteria found for
discarding a hypothesis-contradicting experimental observations, sometimes in a subtle and counterintuitive way. In
addition, mathematical models can provide insight into
some general design principles that biochemically-based
cell control systems can use to perform a particular function.
All these considerations are especially true for the intricate
regulation of eukaryotic gradient sensing and chemotaxis,
leading to a long history of a quantitative and modeling
research.
Our model attempts first to derive principles that must be
true for any chemotactic cell capable of displaying both
perfect adaptation and persistent signaling with nonlinear
signal amplification, and then, to investigate whether and
how these principles are effected in a particular cell system.
As a result, we will obtain a model related to a simple
mechanism for gradient sensing, qualitatively outlined recently (Parent and Devreotes, 1999), thus providing support
for some of its premises and conclusions, but also making
the model more realistic and quantitative. We then complement it with a new mechanism for signal amplification and
show how this model can be experimentally verified. We
also argue that an alternative hypothesis for a mechanism of
gradient sensing outlined in the next paragraph is probably
invalid, at least in amoebae and neutrophils. The dynamical

Models of Eukaryotic Gradient Sensing

model presented in our study can thus provide a mathematical formalism that can be used more effectively as a paradigm of eukaryotic gradient sensing.
Unlike most explanations of eukaryotic gradient sensing
presented to date, the phenomenological model put forward
in Meinhardt (1999) is formulated mathematically and results in semiquantitative predictions. This model is based on
the principle, formulated by Turing and adapted in Gierer
and Meinhardt (1972) to explain biological pattern formation. The Turing principle postulates that stable patterns
may arise if there is an autocatalytic local production of an
activator that also causes production of an inhibitor. Unlike
the activator, the inhibitor is assumed to be capable of
long-range diffusion. This model is based on local positive
and global negative feedback that can lead to a substantial
amplification of a locally applied signal, thus making it
attractive in trying to account for substantial signal amplification observed in eukaryotic gradient sensing. However,
in addition to predicting signal amplification, the Turing
principle also predicts that the activation pattern becomes
stable. This presents a problem, because it is known that the
gradient-sensing signaling systems need to readjust themselves continuously to be able to sense changes in the
environment. In Meinhardt (1999), this difficulty is overcome by proposing a second inactivating enzyme with a
longer activation time, acting locally to “poison” the activity peak and “unlock” the local activation in the system.
This assumption however makes the model far less parsimonious and, thus, more difficult to accept.
Meinhardt also points out that the cytoskeleton rearrangements are integral to biochemical interpretation of his
model. Recently, it has been realized, however, that eukaryotic gradient sensing can be decoupled from cytoskeletondependent processes. In particular, Dictyostelium discoideum cells, in which actin polymerization is inhibited by
latrunculin A, can still activate a variety of signaling pathways in a gradient-dependent, spatially polarized manner
(Parent and Devreotes, 1999). These rounded cells, lacking
mobility and polarization imposed by actin polymerization,
clearly exhibit both adaptability and persistence of signaling
without substantial dynamic fluctuations observed in cells
with intact actin polymers. It can be demonstrated that
Meinhardt’s model fails to account for this behavior. In
particular, the model predicts no perfect adaptation, whereas
action of the two inhibitors make persistent activation at a
particular membrane location impossible. Finally, it should
be pointed out that the phenomenon of the Ca2⫹-induced
Ca2⫹ release from the intracellular stores postulated as the
mechanism of the positive feedback is doubtful, because
inhibition of Ca2⫹ concentration changes by cell permealization and other means does not affect gradient sensing in
D. discoideum, a common model system used in studies of
eukaryotic chemotaxis (Van Duijn and Van Haastert, 1992;
Traynor et al., 2000). Several studies suggested that the only
aspect of chemotaxis for which upregulation of Ca2⫹ is re-

51

quired is efficient detachment of the uropode in migrating
amoebae and neutrophils (Eddy et al., 2000). These considerations call into question the general applicability of the approach in Meinhardt (1999) to modeling of gradient sensing.
Decoupling chemoattractant gradient sensing from cell
movement and cytoskeletal rearrangements can greatly facilitate consideration of the underlying biochemical regulation. Indeed, the actin cytoskeleton remodeling and its connection to various intracellular and extracellular cues
mediated by a multitude of regulatory proteins may present
an intimidating if not impossible task for a modeler. The
matter is further complicated by the need to account for cell
adhesion properties, loss and synthesis of the cell membrane, variable cell shape, etc. It is therefore of importance
that gradient sensing and cytoskeleton regulation represent
separable components of chemotaxis. In this work, we concentrate on the analysis of the cytoskeleton-independent
gradient sensing, creating a model that may be integrated
with the model of cytoskeletal regulation at a later point.
We present, here, necessary conditions for the organization or topology of a gradient-sensing biochemical network
and a plausible biochemical scheme that may embody these
principles in D. discoideum and neutrophils. Whereas the
models by Meinhardt and others (D. Lauffenburger and A.
Arkin, personal communications) were driven primarily by
the need to explain high gain in gradient sensing, we use a
different strategy. It consists in accounting first for perfect
adaptation (because it does not involve spatial consideration, and the model is simpler), then in seeing how this
model needs to be modified to account for persistent signaling, as opposed to adaptation, in the presence of gradients. Finally, we explore possible mechanisms of signal
amplification consistent with adaptation and persistent signaling.

MODEL AND RESULTS
Perfect adaptation to spatially uniform changes
in ligand concentrations
Perfect adaptation is commonly observed in gradient-sensing systems (Alon et al., 1999; Van Haastert, 1983). A
simple analysis shows that perfect adaptation allows a sensory system to respond to the gradient itself rather than to
the absolute value of the signal. Any deviation from the
precise character of adaptation can result in persistent activation in the absence of signal gradients, a situation that can
severely limit the range of inputs, over which a system can
operate efficiently. We thus need to account for perfect
adaptation in our model of gradient-sensing signal transduction.
A mechanism for generating robust perfect adaptation
based on receptor modification has been proposed previously for bacterial chemotaxis (Alon et al., 1999; Yi et al.,
2000). However, receptor modification has been shown to
Biophysical Journal 82(1) 50 – 63

52

Levchenko and Iglesias

compared to the activation of the two enzymes, the concentration of R* is a function of the ratio of the concentrations
of A and I. The steady-state concentration of R* is independent of both the external signal concentration and the ratio
of inactivation rates. The peak value of the transient response is inversely proportional to the adaptation time.
Possible mechanisms of signal amplification
(gain in signaling)

FIGURE 1 Scheme for achieving perfect adaptation. (A) The response
element can be found in one of two states: active (R*) or inactive (R).
Transitions between the two states are catalyzed by the activation (A) and
inactivation (I) enzymes. The activity levels of the two enzymes are both
regulated by the signal (S). (B) Sample predictions of the adaptation
scheme depicted in (A). Normalized concentration of the response element
is plotted as a function of normalized time for a 10% increase at time 0 in
the concentration of the signaling molecule S. The ratio ␣ of inactivation
rates of I and A determines the transients. For 0 ⬍ ␣ ⬍ 1, activation of A
is faster than that of I, resulting in a transient increase in the concentration
of R*. Smaller values of ␣ lead to larger transients and longer adaptation
times. Plots corresponding to values of ␣ of 0.1 (largest transient) 0.3, 0.5,
0.7 and 0.9 (smallest transient) are shown.

be unessential for G-protein-mediated adaptation in eukaryotes (Kim et al., 1997), the main focus of this study.
Therefore, we consider here two different mechanisms allowing the achievement of precise adaptation downstream
of the receptor in a signaling pathway.
The scheme leading to precise adaptation proposed here
is based on the assumption that a signal S increases the
concentration of an activator A, whose action is to convert
some response element R into the activated form R* (Fig.
1). For adaptation to take place, an inactivator I, mediating
the reverse conversion of R* to R, needs to be introduced. S
activates both A and I in fixed proportion. As shown in the
Appendix, this scheme can lead to perfect adaptation because the corresponding equations have solutions for the
concentration of R* that are not a function of S. Formulation
of these equations requires further assumptions, namely that
the reactions of activation (production) of A and of I have
the same form of dependence on S. A similar scheme
achieving perfect adaptation (not shown) can be formulated
relying on the inactivation of I being a saturated process.
Below, we show that these two mechanisms represent plausible descriptions of the biochemical processes underlying
gradient sensing in amoebae and neutrophils. In Fig. 1 B we
demonstrate numerically that the scheme in Fig. 1 A leads to
perfect adaptation to changes in the external signal S. The
model equations for this and the other simulations are found
in the Appendix. The amplitude and duration of the response is a function of the ratio of inactivation rates of the
activator A and inactivator I. If the activation of R is fast
Biophysical Journal 82(1) 50 – 63

Significant nonlinear signal amplification has been postulated to occur in the biochemical pathways mediating eukaryotic gradient sensing. As discussed above, this phenomenon appears to be so dramatic that previous modeling
efforts have been focused primarily on description of the
high gain rather than adaptation aspects of the sensory
signal transduction. Moreover, the presence of a Turing-like
positive feedback mechanism is often assumed. However,
as mentioned above, the Turing mechanism is not particularly appealing as a means for amplification in gradient
sensing. Here, we propose a different amplification scheme,
also based on a positive feedback loop.
The overall rate of an enzymatic reaction far from saturation with a given reaction efficiency (measured as the
ratio of the maximum rate to the Michaelis constant, vmax/
KM) can be increased if the concentration of the active
enzyme or that of the substrate is augmented. In the feedback scheme we propose (Fig. 2 B), the reaction product R*
affects the supply of the substrate R, but not the activation
of the enzyme. The supply here can mean regulation of a
reaction resulting in production of R or a transport process
leading to increased local concentrations of R. The concentration of the active enzyme is taken to be proportional to
the external signal S. If the signal is absent, the reaction
cannot proceed and the positive feedback, if present, is
discontinued. If the signal is present, the reaction proceeds,
and the substrate-supply feedback gets activated. This sort
of positive feedback is inherently dependent on the presence
of the external signal. It is important to emphasize that the
positive feedback-containing scheme presented in Fig. 2 B,
unlike other mechanisms involving positive feedback (such
as that in Meinhardt, 1999), allows the sensory system to be
sensitive to variations of extracellular signal strength. Indeed, this scheme includes a reaction that can only proceed
in the presence of external signal activation. Therefore, the
feedback loop in Fig. 2 B contains a sort of a circuit breaker
that allows the system to avoid going into signal-independent auto-activation cycling mode. As soon as the external
signal is removed (or the system has adapted to it) the
positive feedback is inactivated.
In principle, signal amplification does not need to involve
a positive feedback as a mechanism. For instance, amplification may occur due to high cooperativity of the activation
process or because not only the concentration of the product
(R*) but also that of the substrate (R) are positively regu-

Models of Eukaryotic Gradient Sensing

53

3 B, adaptation occurs on the level of R*, whereas amplification takes place one step downstream, on the level of R*1.
Placing adaptation upstream of the gain-producing processes may be advantageous if the same upstream signal
activates several downstream pathways. Each of those pathways may have different amplification mechanisms and
characteristics, but all cease activation as soon as adaptation
in a single upstream reaction takes place. We will discuss
below a possible relevance of this argument to various
G-protein-mediated signaling processes in eukaryotic gradient sensing.

Persistent signaling in the presence of ligand
gradients: gradient sensing

FIGURE 2 Possible mechanisms for signal amplification. (A) Nonlinear
signal amplification can be achieved by having the activation process act at
multiple levels as in A, where the enzyme catalyzes the activation of both
the response element R* and its substrate R. (B) Stronger amplification is
achieved through the “substrate supply” mechanism of positive feedback in
which the response element acts to increase the concentration of its
precursor. (C) Input– output response of the systems depicted in (A)
(dashed line) and (B) (solid line). For comparison, the case when the signal
A acts only on the conversion from R to R* with no positive feedback is
shown (dotted line). As discussed in the text, for small and large concentrations of A, the two systems in (A) and (B) exhibit the same slope and thus
have the same gain. However, for intermediate concentrations of A, the
positive feedback scheme exhibits much higher slopes. Constants used are
␣ ⫽ 100, ␤ ⫽ 100, ␥ ⫽ 1, ␦ ⫽ 10, ⑀ ⫽ 0 (dashed) and ␣ ⫽ 100, ␤ ⫽ 100,
␥ ⫽ 1, ␦ ⫽ 0, ⑀ ⫽ 10 (solid).

lated by the signal S (Fig. 2 A). Although simulations
corresponding to both these schemes show a nonlinear
response to changes in the input levels, the positive feedback-mediated scheme shown in Fig. 2 B can provide far
higher gains. We can expect, therefore, that, in systems
exhibiting high-gain behavior, as many gradient sensing
systems seem to do, the positive feedback outlined in Fig. 2
B will be present in one way or another.
Provided that the inactivator acts to reverse the processes
mediated by A, the possible amplification schemes in Fig. 2
can be combined with the adaptation scheme proposed in
Fig. 1 to obtain high-gain signaling with perfect adaptation
(Fig. 3). It is thus possible to achieve both adaptation and
amplification properties on the same level in a sensory
signaling pathway (conversion of R into R* and the reverse
process).
Adaptation and amplification may also occur on different
levels. For example, in the two-step pathway shown in Fig.

In the previous sections, we analyzed how G-protein-activated signaling systems can adapt perfectly to spatially
homogeneous changes in ligand concentration. The same
systems become activated persistently in the presence of
ligand gradients. It is of interest, then, to see whether the
simple schemes presented above are sufficient to explain
both adaptability and persistent signaling depending on the
spatial organization of the input signal. If we assume all
intracellular signaling to occur locally (e.g., within a close
neighborhood of the receptor–G-protein complex), perfect
adaptation would mean that signaling activity would tend to
the same steady-state value independent of the local extracellular ligand concentration. Therefore, the assumption of
local signal transduction in combination with perfect adaptation does not allow formation of a gradient of intracellular
signaling activity even in the presence of an external ligand
gradient. It follows that some aspect of signaling has to be
global (diffusible) within the cytosol. Additional analysis
reveals (data not shown) that the highest activity gradient
results if the inactivator is allowed to diffuse while the
activator A is assumed to be immobile or slowly diffusing
(see also Postma and van Haastert, 2001). This assumption
is sufficient to predict both adaptability and persistent signaling, as illustrated in Fig. 3. In Fig. 3, C and D, we
illustrate the gain amplification of the positive feedbackcontaining scheme depicted in Fig. 3 B and its gradientsensing capabilities. The only signaling molecule that is
allowed to diffuse is the inactivator. At first, the system is
excited by a homogeneous change in external source—all
parts of the cell experience the same activation levels. At a
later point, the levels of R* (Fig. 3 C) and R*1 (Fig. 3 D)
adapt to the signal. Note, however, that the increase in
concentration for R*1 is considerably larger. The system is
then excited by a spatially inhomogeneous signal. The concentration of S at the “front” is increased by 5% and that of
the “rear” is decreased by 5% with corresponding changes
linearly along the length of the cell. The system now exhibits a corresponding graded response. Note that, once
again, the increase in activity of R*1 is considerably larger
Biophysical Journal 82(1) 50 – 63

54

Levchenko and Iglesias

and displays nonlinearity of response. The equilibrium responses in both R* and R*1 along the length of the cell are
contrasted in Fig. 3 E.
G-protein-mediated gradient sensing: relationship
between the model and biochemistry
In this section, we consider the known biochemistry of
eukaryotic gradient sensing based on activation of G-protein-associated chemokine receptors (Gi family of G-proteins), as studied in D. discoideum and neutrophils. The
principal signaling pathways, shown to be essential in a
variety of experiments, are illustrated in Fig. 4 A. Receptor
occupation by a chemoattractant leads to G-protein activation followed by activation of various downstream effectors, most notably phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-␥ (PI3K)
(Rickert et al., 2000). Activation of PI3K leads to phosphorylation of various phosphoinositides at the D-3 position of
the inositol ring. Phosphoinositide phosphates PI(4,5)P2 and
PI(3,4,5)P3 (henceforth denoted P2 and P3, respectively) can
further transduce the signal by providing binding sites for
various downstream PH-domain-containing signaling components, such as PLC␦, AKT, and CRAC (Parent and Devreotes, 1999; Servant et al., 2000). A variety of PH-domaincontaining markers has been developed allowing for
straightforward monitoring of phosphoinositide formation
by observing changes in membrane-associated fluorescence. Thus, phosphoinositide concentrations are commonly used as readouts of chemoattractant-stimulated signal transduction. Concentrations of these molecules will
also be used as signaling outputs in our analysis.
Another signal-transduction molecule activated by Gi,
and capable of affecting phosphoinositide levels in response
to chemoattractants, is PLC (specifically ␤2 and ␤3 isoforms) (see Wu et al., 2000 for a summary of recent results).

FIGURE 3 Integrated adaptation and signal amplification schemes. (A)
The adaptation scheme of Fig. 1 can be combined with the amplification
schemes of Fig. 2 at the same level. This scheme is similar to that of
Biophysical Journal 82(1) 50 – 63

Fig. 1 A, but, in this case, the activation enzyme also increases the
concentration of the substrate R. Provided that the activation of the two
enzymes A and I by the external signal S is proportional, the system will
adapt, but the transients will be amplified compared to Fig. 1 A. (B) The
schemes can also be combined in series. Here the adaptation scheme of Fig.
1 A is followed by the signal amplification scheme of Fig. 2 B. The
effectiveness of the latter scheme is illustrated by plotting the corresponding concentrations of R* (C) and R*1 (D). In these figures, a one-dimensional model of the cell’s response is simulated. At 0 s, the concentration
of S is increased uniformly by 10%. As can be seen, the peak increase in
the concentration of R*1 is significantly higher than that of R*. When the
external signal becomes nonhomogeneous, this has significant implications
to the cell’s polarization. At 120 s, the external concentration is increased
5% at the front and decreased 5% at the rear. In Fig. 3 C and D, we show
the concentrations at the front (dotted), center (solid), and rear (dashed).
(E) The concentrations at steady state (240 s) across the normalized length
of the cell. The normalized concentrations of R* (dotted) and R*1 (solid) are
plotted. As expected from Eq. A8 in the text, the ⫾5% external gradient in
S manifests itself in a smaller gradient for R*. However, because this
concentration is near the point of highest gain in the second subsystem, a
large concentration gradient in R*1 ensues.

Models of Eukaryotic Gradient Sensing

55

FIGURE 4 Spatial sensing mechanism of Dictyostelium and neutrophils. (A) The essential biochemical pathways implicated in gradient sensing
(described in detail in the text). The output of the pathway is the concentrations of P3. The nonlinear character of response is assumed to be mediated by
one or more small G-proteins (SGP). This feedback is of the substrate supply kind, illustrated in Fig. 2 B. (B) Simulation of the model corresponding to
(A). Concentration of P3 is shown both as a function of time and position along the cell. The signal is increased homogeneously by 20% at 0 s and removed
at 100 s. It is seen that the system adapts perfectly both these changes. A graded input is applied (⫹5% at the front, ⫺5% at the rear and varying linearly
along the length of the cell) at 200 s. The graded response in P3 concentration, which disappears after removal of the graded input at 300 s, is shown.

PLC acts by hydrolyzing P2 to insosytol-3-phosphaste and
diacylglycerol, both of which may affect downstream signaling events, including Ca2⫹ upregulation and activation
of protein kinase C (PKC). It may appear that chemotactic
events can be influenced negatively by PLC activation,
because the P2, the substrate for PI3K, is depleted. Experimental evidence shows that depletion of PLC can indeed
affect chemotaxis positively for some chemoattractants, but
has no significant effect on chemotaxis toward other chemoattractants. The effect of PLC is thus not uniform
throughout chemoattractant-receptor families and is probably receptor specific. In particular, it has been suggested
that PLC activation leads to downregulation of signaling by
certain receptor classes by receptor desensitization through
activation of PKC (Ali et al., 1999). In this report, we
assume that, although PLC may affect P2 concentration to
some degree, this effect is insignificant for the signaling
pathways involved in gradient sensing.

TABLE 1

Numerous studies indicate that plasma-membrane concentrations of P3 is relatively low in the absence of stimulation and return precisely to the baseline values following
spatially uniform changes in ligand concentration (perfect
adaptation). The total cellular and possibly cell membrane
concentration of P2, in contrast, is relatively high in the
absence of the signal and does not seem to change significantly following exposure to chemoattractant (Stephens et
al., 2000). However, a wealth of data indicates that P2
induces uncapping and subsequent elongation of actin filaments by modulating interaction of profilin, ␣-actinin, vinculin, talin, and various actin-capping proteins with actin
(Czech, 2000). These findings suggest a possibility of significant local changes in concentration of this phosphoinositide that might be masked when compared to its total
cellular concentration. A recent study provides support for
this view (Tall et al., 2000). Finally, the baseline concentration of PI(4)P (denoted here as PIP) is relatively high,

Kinetic rate constants assumed in simulation in Fig. 4 B
k⫺K ⫽ 5.0 s⫺1
k⫺P ⫽ 0.57 s⫺1
k⫺S ⫽ 2.1 s⫺1
k⫺1 ⫽ 2.1 s⫺1
k⫺2 ⫽ 1.4 s⫺1
k⫺3 ⫽ 5.0 ␮M⫺1 s⫺1

kK ⫽ 5.0 s⫺1
kP ⫽ 0.49 s⫺1
kS ⫽ 8.0 s⫺1
k1 ⫽ 1.0 ⫻ 103 ␮M s⫺1
k2 ⫽ 6.2 ⫻ 10⫺4 s⫺1
k3 ⫽ 8.0 ⫻ 10⫺2 ␮M⫺1 s⫺1

D ⫽ 5 ␮m2 s⫺1
k11 ⫽ 1.4 s⫺1
k21 ⫽ 4.3 ␮M⫺1 s⫺1
k31 ⫽ 2.9 ⫻ 10⫺3 ␮M⫺1
Biophysical Journal 82(1) 50 – 63

56

whereas its regulation during signal transduction is not well
understood (Stephens et al., 2000).
As indicated in Fig. 4 A, phosphoinositide regulation may
involve a number of positive feedback mechanisms. It is
well documented, for example, that activity of PIP5Ks, the
enzymes acting to form P2 from PIP, is positively regulated
by small G-proteins Rac, Rho, and Arf (Czech, 2000).
These proteins, in turn, can be upregulated through formation of P3 (Missy et al., 1998). Significantly, formation of
PIP in the Golgi complex can be positively regulated by Arf
through recruitment of phosphatidylinositol-4-OH kinase
(PI4K) (Czech, 2000). It is conceivable that similar upregulation of PIP in the plasma membrane may occur through
the action of Rho and Rac. The resultant high concentrations
of PIP will provide more substrate for formation of P3
(through increased P2 formation). Finally, a significant role
of Cdc42 activation by phosphoinositides in response to a
chemoattractant has been suggested by recent experiments
(Glogauer et al., 2000). Again, this small G-protein may, by
analogy with Rac, Rho, and Arf be involved in the biochemical positive feedback proposed here.
The perfect adaptation of P3 is of central importance to
our model. Initially, it was suggested that adaptation took
place primarily at the level of receptor by feedback phosphorylation of its C-terminal cytoplasmic domain following
signal propagation (Knox et al., 1986). However, as mentioned above, receptor modification is not necessary for
adaptation, and additional mechanisms underlying this
property must exist (Kim et al., 1997). In the following
discussion, we assume that the chemoattractant receptor is
modified to prevent phosphorylation. From Fig. 4 A, it can
be seen that the only remaining possibilities are to assume
that either adaptation of the receptor-associated G-protein,
or that the formation of P3 adapts to changes in signaling
input. Although perfect adaptation at the level of G-protein
seems attractive for explanation of a variety of G-proteinactivated processes (both phosphoinositide-dependent and
not) exhibiting precise adaptation, there are experimental
indications that no such adaptation takes place. First, preincubation of D. discoideum cells with the chemoattractant
cAMP decreases the ability of the G-protein to be activated
by a GTP analog in a receptor-independent manner (Pupillo
et al., 1992). Second, FRET studies of dissociation of ␣ and
␤␥ subunits of G-protein occurring in G-protein activation
reveal that these subunits remain dissociated as long as the
receptor is occupied (Janetopoulos et al., 2001). These findings indicate that G-protein remains activated continuously
in the presence of the signal, making it likely that adaptation
occurs downstream of G-protein activation.
Assuming that adaptation takes place downstream of
G-protein activation, this implies that activation of the Gprotein and its effectors including PI3K remains elevated as
long as the ligand is present. Because the level of P3 adapts
perfectly, a phosphatase opposing PI3K, most likely PTEN,
has to be upregulated in response to G-protein activation.
Biophysical Journal 82(1) 50 – 63

Levchenko and Iglesias

Currently, we do not know precisely the mechanism of
PTEN activation and thus cannot assert the identity of the P3
inhibitor. However, we can predict, on the basis of the
above considerations, that this inactivator is either regulated
directly by the receptor or G-protein in a manner similar to
activation of PI3K, or is activated by its substrates, e.g., P3.
In the latter case, we also predict that inactivation of this
phosphatase is a saturated process. Regulation of the inactivator enzyme by the substrates appears to be less likely,
because no adaptation occurs when P3 is produced by means
other than G-protein-mediated signaling, e.g., by insulin or
PDGF receptor activation (Oatey et al., 1999). Adaptation is
thus likely to be dependent on the events upstream of
phosphoinositide metabolism.
As discussed above, to account for persistent signaling in
the presence of chemoattractant gradients, candidates for
inactivator molecules (PTEN or similar molecular species)
have to possess an additional property. Namely, the inactivator molecule has to be diffusible in its active state. Members of PTEN families have this property, and can be
considered as relevant contenders for the role of inhibitor.
The issue of signal amplification in the biochemical pathways defined above can now be addressed. We mentioned
that there are feedback mechanisms mediated by the small
GTPases of the Rho family that can increase the production
of P2 and PIP following upregulation of P3. Because P2 and
PIP are substrates required to produce P3, the amplification
can proceed according to the gain mechanisms described
above (Fig. 2). Indeed, production of P3 is amplified by the
positive feedback from P3 directly onto formation of its
substrate P2. Here the activator A is PI3K, whereas the
substrate R is P2 and the product R* is P3. In both cases, the
activation ceases as soon as the activator (the active PI3K)
is removed. These gain schemes are therefore sensitive to
signal variations (including changes in the ligand gradients)
and can operate successfully if adaptation occurs at the level
upstream of phosphoinositides. As illustrated above, these
schemes are also compatible with the adaptation mechanisms operating at the level of phosphoinositides.
From the above consideration, the following likely
scheme of G-protein-mediated signal transduction events in
D. discoideum and neutrophils in response to chemoattractants emerges. Following G-protein activation of PI3K, this
enzyme increases the concentration of P3. Following this
initial increase, one or more members of the Rho family of
small G-proteins is activated, leading to upregulation of
membrane-localized PIP5K and PI4K. These kinases, in
turn, increase production of PI3K substrates: P2 and PIP,
leading to signal amplification. The G-protein activation
also leads to activation of PTEN or a similar PI3K-counteracting phosphatase. As a result, in spatially uniform
concentrations of the ligand, the action of PI3K is balanced
to achieve the baseline levels of D-3-position inositol phosphorylation. The feedback loops are interrupted and the
signaling mechanism adapts perfectly. If the system is faced

Models of Eukaryotic Gradient Sensing

57
TABLE 2

150

Sensitivity analysis
Gradient

100

k⫺K
kK
k⫺P
kP
D
k⫺S
kS
k⫺1

50

0

-50

-100
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

FIGURE 5 Spatial sensing mechanism: response to various external
gradients. The system of Fig. 4 was subjected to varying gradients, ⫾2%,
⫾5%, ⫾10%, and ⫾25%, relative to that of the center, in the concentration
of the external source. The spatial response along the length of the cell is
plotted.

with a chemoattractant gradient, diffusion of PTEN or a
similar inactivator leads to an incomplete balance of PI3K
action and results in persistent signaling oriented in the
direction of the gradient.
The mathematical description of our model of the adaptation mechanism of D. discoideum and neutrophils is found
in the Appendix, and the results of corresponding simulations are shown in Fig. 4 B. The kinetic constants used are
given in Table 1. The homogeneous concentration of Gprotein signal was first increased by 20% from its baseline
level at t ⫽ 0 s. This results in a perfectly adapting spatially
homogeneous response. This response is duplicated when
the G-protein signal returns to basal level (100 s). Finally, a
graded input is applied (200 s) by a graded level of Gprotein signal varying from the basal level ⫹5% at the front
and ⫺5% at the rear and linearly throughout the cell. Our
model exhibits a graded response, with the ratio activity
between front and rear nearing ⫾25% that disappears when
the G-protein signal once again returns to the basal level
(300 s).
Although the responses seen in Fig. 4 B are highly
nonlinear, their amplitudes are not as great as may be
expected on the basis of experimental data, often showing
what apparently are more substantial increases. However,
the experiments are often performed with gradients not as
shallow as the ⫾5% gradient assumed in Fig. 4 B. To
explore the response characteristics of the system depicted
in Fig. 4 further, we subjected the cell model to different
gradients of the G-protein, varying from ⫾2% to 25% (Fig.
5). It can be easily seen that the intracellular activity gradient is a sensitive nonlinear function of the gradient value.
In particular, there is a more than two-fold increase in
activity at the cell front in the ⫾25% gradient. This result is
important, because it shows that the system in Fig. 4 can

Decrease
(%)

Increase
(%)

5.1
5.4
9.9
5.1
24.5
5.1
5.4
5.1

5.4
5.1
2.2
5.4
154.9
5.4
5.1
5.4

Gradient

k1
k11
k⫺2
k2
k21
k⫺3
k3
k31

Decrease
(%)

Increase
(%)

5.4
65.1
5.1
66.2
5.4
5.1
5.0
67.0

5.2
65.0
5.4
60.4
5.1
5.4
5.0
60.8

Nominal parameter values were either increased or decreased five-fold.
The observed gradient, defined as the ratio P3(front)/P3(rear) ⫺ 1, was
computed. The nominal value is 65.1%. From the numbers obtained, it can
be seen that deviations away from the nominal parameter values cause a
loss in the ultrasensitivity of the system (see text).

respond to the value of the gradient, not just the presence
versus absence of gradient. The relatively low response seen
for small gradient values is consistent with low precision of
gradient detection seen in cells migrating in shallow chemoattractant gradients. The precision goes up as the gradient values increase.
To measure the system’s sensitivity to parameter variations, each kinetic constant was increased/decreased fivefold. The response was checked for two qualitative properties. First, does the system adapt? To determine this, we
calculated the concentration just before 100 s to just before
0 s. We found that, in all cases, the difference between these
two concentrations amounted to ⬍0.2%. Thus, perfect adaptation is a structural property of the model, not unlike that
in Barkai and Leibler (1997). Second, we determined
whether the system can detect spatial gradients. For this, we
compute the activity ratio between front and rear of the cells
at 300 s. The respective changes are seen in Table 2. From
these data, it is clear that large deviations from most of the
nominal kinetic parameters can cause a loss of the ultrasensitivity obtained. This can be explained by analogy to the
gain mechanism depicted in Fig. 2 B and analyzed in the
Appendix. In particular, a relative-large increase in internal
gradient is achieved if the input concentration is centered at
the “transition” regime of the system in Fig. 2 B. In Fig. 2
C, this amounts to log A ⫽ 0. This means that a small
relative difference between front and rear in the concentrations of this stimulus will cause a large relative difference in
the response.
However, if the kinetic parameters deviate from their
nominal values, the regime of operation will shift either to
the right or left on Fig. 2 C, where the slope (log R* versus
log A) is ⬃1. Thus, the internal gradient will mirror the
external gradient. We thus conclude that the property of
spatial sensing, like that of adaptation, is robust, but that the
ultrasensitivity seen is not.
Biophysical Journal 82(1) 50 – 63

58

DISCUSSION
In this study, we argue that substantial insights into the
problem of eukaryotic gradient sensing can be gained from
mathematical analysis of the necessary conditions for some
of the biochemical properties of this process. Namely, any
proposed biochemically-based model has to be able to account for both perfect adaptation of signaling to spatially
homogeneous variations of chemoattractant concentration
and also for high-gain persistent polarized signaling in
response to chemoattractant gradients. The model also
needs to be able to predict a high degree of sensitivity of
polarized signaling to changes in the ligand gradient, e.g.,
due to gradual changes in the value or direction of the
gradients. As demonstrated here, these necessary conditions
substantially limit the number of possible ways a gradientsensing biochemical network can be organized. The mathematically motivated limitations, coupled with information
on various aspects of known biochemistry, allowed us to
suggest a plausible scheme of gradient sensing in D. discoideum and neutrophils.
First, we considered the property of perfect adaptation.
Perfect adaptation is commonly observed in various Gprotein or growth-factor receptor-mediated signaling pathways implicated in gradient sensing. Several models of
perfect adaptation in these pathways have been suggested
before. For example, in Tang and Othmer (1994), it is
proposed that adaptation occurs due to activation of both
activating and inhibitory G-proteins. Other investigators
ascribed adaptation mechanism to receptor regulation properties (Knox et al., 1986). We also should note that a
receptor modification-based model has been successfully
advocated for bacterial chemotaxis (Alon et al., 1999).
Here, we investigate two models distinct from those proposed previously primarily because recent experimental observations add new restrictions on how a biochemical
scheme underlying adaptation can operate. In particular, it
has been determined that receptor phosphorylation is not
essential in adaptation and that no redistribution of receptor
molecules occurs in migrating Dictyostelium cells (Kim et
al., 1997). In addition, only one G-protein species has been
shown to mediate adaptation and chemotaxis (Neptune and
Bourne, 1997), which argues against a previously proposed
model of G-protein-based adaptation (Tang and Othmer,
1994).
The adaptation schemes proposed here postulate, in general, the existence of a process, the regulation of which
results in adaptation of the activity of this process with
respect to an external stimulus. The possible adaptation in
activity of the G-protein to activation of the associated
receptor or adaptation of phosphoinositide phosphorylation
can be considered as examples of this process. As downregulation of activation is presumed to be mediated by an
inhibitory molecule, assumptions on how the inactivator
itself is activated need to be made. Two possibilities can
Biophysical Journal 82(1) 50 – 63

Levchenko and Iglesias

then be considered: inactivator regulation by the activity of
the process itself or by events upstream of the process. The
fact that adaptation is perfect leads to further limitations on
the mechanisms of inactivator regulation. In particular, if
the inactivator is regulated downstream of the adaptation
process, the inactivator downregulation has to be saturated.
If, however, an upstream process regulates the inactivator,
this regulation needs to be proportional to the activation of
the corresponding activator. These conditions for perfect
adaptation can be tested experimentally. In particular, on the
basis of the plausible biochemical scheme proposed in the
text, one can predict that the steady-state activation of
PTEN or a similar phosphatase is proportional to activation
of PI3K. Further analysis of PTEN regulation is needed to
verify this prediction.
Another prediction concerning the inactivator is that it
has to be freely diffusible in the cytosol. This prediction
reflects an added necessary condition needed to explain
persistent signaling polarization in chemoattractant gradients in addition to perfect adaptation to spatially homogeneous changes in chemoattractant. Again, for PTEN or other
inactivator candidate, this prediction can be verified experimentally. For instance, any PTEN modification preventing
its diffusion is likely to limit the accuracy of gradient
detection in chemotaxis. It is important to emphasize that
the predictions as to the nature of the inactivator regulation
and its diffusivity are made on the basis of consideration of
the basic properties of perfect adaptation and persistent
signaling and, thus, are expected to hold for any candidate
for the role of the inhibitor.
A major challenge in modeling gradient sensing is to
reconcile the strongly nonlinear signal response with high
sensitivity to the presence and the amplitude of the signal.
So far, it has been common to assume that some sort of
Turing-like positive feedback acting from the activator of
signaling onto its own production is needed to explain the
high gain characteristics of signal amplification. This hypothesis, however, invariably leads to formation of stable
signaling patterns independent of the external ligand gradient. We argue here that several alternative schemes, with
only one relying on a positive feedback, can be proposed to
explain nonlinear signal amplification. Furthermore, there is
a significant difference between the nature of the positive
feedback mechanism proposed here and the modification of
the Turing mechanism proposed by Meinhardt and others.
The mechanism suggested here postulates that gradient
sensing can be mediated by a positive feedback from the
activator onto the supply of its precursor (or its inactivated
form) rather than on the activator production itself. This
kind of “substrate supply”-driven feedback scheme provides
an opportunity to amplify the response significantly, while
retaining the sensitivity to the presence of the promoteractivating enzyme. No requirement for a second inhibitor,
as needed in the Meinhardt model, is any longer present.
This approach can be used to modify not only the gradient-

Models of Eukaryotic Gradient Sensing

sensing signaling schemes suggested before, but also perhaps other models, in which a Turing-like pattern-generating schemes are utilized but not justified.
Consideration of the biochemical mechanisms implicated
in gradient sensing in D. discoideum can serve to verify the
plausibility of a signal gain scheme. Indeed, although Ca2⫹induced Ca2⫹ release proposed by Meinhardt has been
shown to be dispensable for gradient sensing in D. discoideum, phosphorylation of various phosphoinositides is
thought to be at the core of the corresponding signal transduction. Here, we propose the existence of a small Gprotein-mediated positive feedback scheme leading to production the phosphoinositides P3. Its concentration, very
low in quiescent cells, undergoes sharp transient (in adaptive response) or persistent (in gradient-sensing response)
increases following exposure to a chemoattractant. A quick
analysis of the available biochemical information on the
underlying signal transduction reveals that the mathematical
mechanisms suggested for the substrate supply-mediated
positive feedback are likely to be embodied in the biochemical mechanisms. The positive feedback can be mediated by
upregulation of PIP and P2 concentrations through the action of one or more small G-proteins (Cdc42, Rac, or Rho),
which are, in turn, activated by P3. Evidence for the importance of small G-protein-mediated feedback in cell orientation has been obtained recently (Rickert et al., 2000).
Although, in this study, we concentrated on modeling of
gradient sensing that can occur independently of cell locomotion, in unperturbed chemotactic systems, the influence
of various factors omitted from this analysis, such as cytoskeleton-mediated polarization of signaling components,
can be of major importance. Indeed, even in the absence of
an external gradient, a variety of cells, including D. discoideum, can migrate in random directions. These cells are
polarized with various signaling molecules, including Gproteins, localized to what can be regarded as the front and
the back of the cell (Jin et al., 2000). Polarization of signaling apparatus can create intracellular signaling gradient
even in the absence of external chemoattractant gradients.
Cytoskeleton-mediated extension of filopodia can further
influence the gradient detection by providing the opportunity for temporal gradient sensing, in which gradients are
measured by subtracting ligand concentrations detected at
different times in the same subcellular location. Numerous
questions are still open in this aspect of chemotaxis, such as
what causes symmetry breaking in the cytoskeleton architecture leading to cell polarization and how commonly
observed oscillations in actin cytoskeleton structure
(Vicker, 2000) can influence chemotaxis. This paper provides a “stepping stone” for addressing these questions
through an analysis of cytoskeleton-independent gradientdetection mechanisms that can regulate actin polymerization.
We anticipate that, in the further chemotaxis models, the
relative roles of P2 and small G-proteins (Cdc42, Rac, and

59

Rho) in regulation of actin polymerization will be further
accounted for. It is becoming clear that actin is polymerized
at the leading edge of migrating cells according to the
dendritic nucleation model, whereby a regulatory protein
complex, Arp2/3, both creates new filaments and crosslinks them into a branching meshwork. Recently, it has been
shown that costimulation of Arp2/3 by both P2 and small
G-proteins (Cdc42 in particular) through accessory WASP
protein family is essential for its activation (Blanchoin et al.,
2000). It is important to have congruent activation of both
these regulators in formation of cell membrane protrusions
at the front of the cell. The nature of the positive feedback
signal amplification suggested here guarantees that both P2
and small G-proteins become activated only if PI3K signaling is present. Unrelated regulatory events leading to increasing concentrations of just P2 or small G-proteins can
mediate other important processes, such as stabilization of
potassium channels (Kobrinsky et al., 2000) or membrane
reshaping (Loyet et al., 1998) but not formation of spikes or
philopodia characteristic of migrating cells.
In this study, we illustrated how the mathematical model
of the processes underlying perfect adaptation and reversible signal amplification can be mapped to biochemical
signaling networks that became known through experimental studies in amoebae and neutrophils, probably the most
common model systems in studies of chemotaxis. It will be
of interest to see whether these general mathematical principles will hold for biochemical signaling networks found in
other chemotaxing systems. Studies of chemotropism in
yeast revealed important differences in the identity of the
sensory pathways involved in gradient sensing in D. discoideum and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Arkowitz, 1999). For
instance, PI3K does not seem to be a major player in yeast
gradient sensing, whereas the MAPK Fus3 seems to have an
essential role. In addition, in migration of fibroblasts or
neuronal growth cones, reception of the signal is not mediated by G-proteins. Despite these biochemical differences,
we suggest that the major underlying principles proposed in
this study, such as the combination of a mechanism for
perfect adaptation with substrate-supply-mediated reversible signal amplification will be at the core of most eukaryotic gradient-sensing systems.
It is of interest to compare our gradient-sensing model
with qualitative descriptions suggested before. One of the
popular ones, proposed in Parent and Devreotes (1999), is
conceptually very similar to the one proposed here in that it
assumes that perfect adaptation is mediated by a broadly
defined balance of the actions of the activator and inactivator of signaling, whereas the persistent response to gradients
is generated by an imbalance of these components due to the
inactivator diffusion. However, no particular mechanisms
(either mathematical or biochemical) have been proposed
and analyzed by the authors, which limited the predictive
power of the model. In addition, no clear explanation for the
sources of nonlinearity in response has been suggested. The
Biophysical Journal 82(1) 50 – 63

60

Levchenko and Iglesias

modeling framework proposed here, both in its general
theoretical and its plausible biochemical embodiments, provides more opportunities for direct experimental test and
further refinement.

trations of these two enzymes are Atot and Itot, respectively. A third
enzyme, the external signal S, mediates activation of two enzymes, whereas
inactivation is assumed to be constitutive. Again, using the form Eq. A1,
the differential equations describing the active states can be written as

dA
⫽ ⫺k⫺AA ⫹ k⬘AS共Atot ⫺ A兲,
dt

APPENDIX
Description of model from Fig. 1
We assume that the response element is found in both an active, R*, and an
inactive, R, state. Conversion from the inactive to the active state is through
the activator enzyme A, whereas inactivation is through the enzyme I.
In Fig. 1 A, we presented three reactions, in which a molecule is
converted by an activator enzyme into the active state and by an inactivator
enzyme into the inactive state. These reaction cycles are assumed for the
activator A, the inactivator I, and the response element R. The relationship
among these components is as follows. For the reaction of R, the activator
is A and the inactivator is I. For the reaction of A, the activator is S (the
external signal) and the inactivator is a constitutively active molecule (not
denoted). By analogy, I is activated by S, and inhibited constitutively. The
consideration of all of these reactions will follow the general treatment in
Goldbeter and Koshland (1981).
First, we consider a general set of reactions for the interconversion
between the active form W* and inactive form W of a signaling molecule.
With the activation mediated by an enzyme E1, the enzyme–substrate
complex designated as U1 and association, dissociation, and reaction
(catalysis) constants denoted, respectively, as kc1, ku1, and ka1, and with the
inactivation mediated by E2 and the corresponding parameters (kc2, ku2, and
ka2), we have,

dI
⫽ ⫺k⫺II ⫹ k⬘IS共Itot ⫺ I兲.
dt
Moreover, we assume that the inactivating reactions for both A and I are far
more efficient (as measured by the value of the ratio of the catalytic rate
constant and the Michaelis–Menten constant) than the activating reaction
mediated by S. A result of this assumption is that the available substrate for
S far exceeds the concentration of the two enzymes; i.e., Atot ⬎⬎ A and
Itot ⬎⬎ I, so that these equations can be simplified as

dA
⫽ ⫺k⫺AA ⫹ kAS,
dt

(A3a)

dI
⫽ ⫺k⫺II ⫹ k⬘IS,
dt

(A3b)

where kA ⫽ k⬘AAtot and kI ⫽ k⬘I Itot. We can rewrite these equations using
the dimensionless fraction of active molecules r ⫽ R*/Rtot, dimensionless
time ␶ ⫽ k⫺at, and similarly, dimensionless concentrations: a ⫽ (kR/k⫺A)A,
2
2
i ⫽ (kRkAk⫺I/kIkA
) I, and s ⫽ (kAkR/k⫺A
)S. The new dimensionless
equations are

dW
⫽ ⫺kc1WE1 ⫹ ku1U1 ⫹ ku2U2,
dt

da
⫽ ⫺共a ⫺ s兲,
d␶

(A4a)

dU1
⫽ kc1WE1 ⫺ 共ku1 ⫹ ka1兲U1,
dt

di
⫽ ⫺␣共i ⫺ s兲,
d␶

(A4b)

dW*
⫽ ⫺kc2W*E2 ⫹ ku2U2 ⫹ ka1U1,
dt

dr
⫽ ⫺␤ir ⫹ a共1 ⫺ r兲,
d␶

(A4c)

dU2
⫽ kc2W*E2 ⫺ 共ku2 ⫹ ka2兲U2.
dt

where ␣ ⫽ (k⫺I/k⫺A) and ␤ ⫽ [(k⫺R/kR)(k⫺A/kA)]/(k⫺I/kI). At the steady
state, the concentrations of normalized activator and inactivator are both
equal to that of the signaling molecule s. For any value of s ⬎ 0, the
normalized concentration of the active response element is

(A1)

It is usual to derive the Michaelis–Menten kinetics from the quasi-steadystate approximation, in which it is assumed that a fast steady state for
intermediate enzyme–substrate complexes is achieved (dU1/dt ⫽ dU2/dt ⫽
0). Using these conditions, the equation for the rate of change in W* given
above can be rewritten as

dW*
W*E2
WE1
⫹ ka1
⫽ ⫺kc2W*E2 ⫹ ku2
dt
KM2
KM1
⫽ ⫺␦W*E2 ⫹ ␭WE1.

(A2)

If both enzymes E1 and E2 operate far from saturation, we can assume that
the values for these enzymes given in Eq. A2 correspond to the total rather
than free concentrations. We will use this form for describing the particular
reactions for R, A, and I. The reaction for R is thus

dR*
⫽ ⫺k⫺RIR* ⫹ kRAR.
dt
As mentioned above, we assume that the activating and inhibitory enzymes
also occur in two states: active (A and I) and inactive. The total concenBiophysical Journal 82(1) 50 – 63

rss ⫽

a/i
,
a/i ⫹ ␤

(A5)

and we note that it is the ratio of enzyme concentrations that determines the
steady-state value of the activity, and that rss is independent of the concentration of the signal s. Moreover, it is the ratio of inactivation constants
␣ that determines the magnitude of the transient. For ␣ ⬍ 1 (resp. ␣ ⬎ 1)
activation of A is faster (resp. slower) than that of I and, hence a transient
increase (resp. decrease) in the concentration of r results to a positive
increase in the concentration of s. When the concentration of the signaling
molecule, s, is zero, Eqs. A4 have an arbitrary equilibrium value for the
concentration of the active response element rss. However, to maintain
continuity in the steady-state value of rss, we postulate that the only
sensible value is that given by Eq. A5.
To contrast the scheme proposed here with that of Goldbeter and
Koshland (1981), we note that, in their study, the equations governing the
activation of the two enzymes occurs in the saturating region of Michaelis–
Menten kinetics. Based on this assumption, they obtain “ultrasensitivity” in
the steady-state response element R* to changes in the external concentration of S. We consider the opposite regime, in which the enzyme activation

Models of Eukaryotic Gradient Sensing

61

occurs in the linear region of Michaelis–Menten kinetics. Interestingly, the
Goldbeter–Koshland model also results in the degree of activation being a
function of the ratio of activating and inhibitory enzymes. Therefore, even
if we assume a Goldbeter–Koshland-style zero-order-sensitivity regime for
R activation, we can still predict perfect adaptation, provided that the
concentrations of active A and I depend on S linearly. In this case, there are
both adaptation of R* and amplification of the signal S occurring without
any extra mechanisms. Although this scheme may seem attractive for a full
description of gradient sensing, a different, positive feedback-based amplification scheme described in the next section agrees better with experimental data (see text).

Description of models from Fig. 2
Both systems can be described by the pair of differential equations;

dR*
k2AR
⫽ ⫺k⫺2R* ⫹
,
dt
kM ⫹ R
dR
⫽ ⫺k⫺1R ⫹ 共k1 ⫹ k1aA ⫹ k1*R*兲
dt
⫹ k⫺2R* ⫺

k2AR
.
kM ⫹ R

(A6)

The first equation describes an enzymatic conversion from R to R* using
Michaelis–Menten kinetics, as well as the reverse reaction. In the second
equation, we assume that there is a basal level of production of R, with
kinetic constant k1. Two other possibilities exist. If k1a ⫽ 0, then the
enzyme A catalyzes the production of substrate as in Fig. 2 A. If k1* ⫽ 0,
then R* provides a positive feedback loop as in Fig. 2 B.
We look for possible equilibria of these two equations. Setting the first
equation to zero, one obtains

R* ⫽

␣AR
k2 AR
⫽
,
k⫺2 kM ⫹ R ␤ ⫹ R

Finally, the third case—that of Fig. 2 B— has ␦ ⫽ 0. Two solutions
exist, but only one is non-negative,

R* ⫽

⫺共␤ ⫹ ␥ ⫺ A␣⑀兲 ⫹ 冑共␤ ⫹ ␥ ⫺ A␣⑀兲2 ⫹ 4␣␭A
.
2⑀

We first consider the instance where the concentration of A is small, that
is, ␤ ⫹ ␥ ⬎⬎ ␣⑀A. In this instance, the solution matches that of the
previous Section. In the other extreme case, where A is very large, the
solution approaches R* ⫽ ␣A ⫹ ␥/⑀. Thus, asymptotically, this solution
matches that of the previous section for large values of concentration in A.
The third regime of interest is the “transition,” which we describe below.
For the two schemes depicted in Fig. 2 there are three regimes, depending on the concentration of A. When A is small, both schemes give rise to
concentrations of R* that vary linearly with respect to A, and having the
same slope. This is the regime when the contributions of either the k1a or
k1* terms are small compared to the k1 term. Thus, neither positive
feedback nor the contribution of A on the substrate R is playing a significant role. When R ⬎⬎ kM, the system saturates. This can only happen when
either k1a ⫽ 0 or k1* ⫽ 0. In this regime, more positive feedback or
contribution of A on R will not be beneficial, and, therefore, the two
schemes have the same slope and, hence, gain.
Where the systems can differ significantly is in the transition area, and
we will compare the gains there. To do this, we assume that

␥ ⬍⬍ R ⫽ ␥ ⫹ ␦A ⫹ ⑀R* ⬍⬍ kM ⫽ ␤.
It is straightforward to check that when ⑀ ⫽ 0, this leads to R* ⫽ (␣␦/␤)A2.
For the positive feedback scheme, in the region far from saturation, R* ⬵
AR/␤ ⫽ ␣A(⑀R* ⫹ ␥)/␤. Thus,

R* ⬇

␣␥A
,
␤共1 ⫺ ␣⑀A兲

provided that A ⬍ 1/(␣⑀). This scheme can provide arbitrarily larger gains
near A ⫽ 1/(␣⑀). However, as the concentration of A approaches this
threshold, we quickly reach saturation. A comparison of the gains for the
two schemes is shown in Fig. 2 C.

Description of models in Fig. 3
where ␣ ⫽ k2/k⫺2 and ␤ ⫽ kM. Similarly,

R⫽

1
共k ⫹ k1aA ⫹ k1*R*兲 ⫽: ␥ ⫹ ␦A ⫹ ⑀R*.
k⫺1 1

Together, these equations lead to the following quadratic equation for the
steady-state concentration of R*:

⑀共R*兲2 ⫹ 共␤ ⫹ ␥ ⫹ A共␦ ⫺ ␣⑀兲兲R* ⫺ ␣A共␥ ⫹ ␦A兲 ⫽ 0.
We consider some special cases in detail. In the base-line level, we
assume that k1a ⫽ k1* ⫽ 0; equivalently, ␦ ⫽ ⑀ ⫽ 0. In this case, there is
only one solution, R* ⫽ [␣␥/(␤⫹␥)]A, showing that the concentration of
R* increases linearly with that of A.
The situation depicted by Fig. 2 A, where there is no feedback, amounts
to setting ⑀ ⫽ 0. Once again, there is only one solution: R* ⫽ ␣A[(␥ ⫹
␦A)/(␤ ⫹ ␥ ⫹ ␦A)]. Notice that, in the two extreme regimes (small and
large concentrations of A), the resultant concentration for R* varies linearly
with that of A. For small A, the slope (␣␥/(␤ ⫹ ␥)) is the same as in the
previous case. For large A, the slope (␣) is strictly larger. In the transition
regime, the concentration of R* varies as the square of A. This is the region
when the production of R due to A is now significantly more than the basal
level (k1aA ⬎⬎ k1) but R has not saturated (kM ⬎⬎ R).

We first analyze the model of Fig. 3 A and consider the analysis of the
system, assuming that the concentration of the external signaling molecule
is homogeneous. This system then combines the schemes of Figs. 1 A and
2 A. The equations governing the evolution of the system are those of Eqs.
A3, together with

dR*
⫽ ⫺k⫺2IR* ⫹ k2AR,
dt
dR
⫽ ⫺k⫺1IR ⫹ k1aA ⫹ k⫺2R* ⫺ k2AR,
dt

(A7)

which is Eq. A2 in the transition regime discussed in the previous section.
Analysis of this pair of equations leads to a steady-state concentration
value for R* as in the previous section,

R*ss ⫽

k2k1a
共A/I兲2,
k⫺2k⫺1

so that the steady-state concentration of R* depends on the square of the
ratio of concentrations of A and I.
The system described by Fig. 3 B consists of a cascade of the systems
described in Fig. 1 A and the system in Fig. 2 B. Thus, if we once again
Biophysical Journal 82(1) 50 – 63

62

Levchenko and Iglesias

concentrate on the transition regime of the previous section, the steadystate concentration of R*1 is given by

R*1⫺ss ⫽

␣␥共A/I兲
.
␤共1 ⫺ ␣⑀共A/I兲兲

We note that it is, once again, the ratio of enzyme concentrations that
governs the behavior of the system. When the activity of these enzymes is
regulated as in Eqs. A3, constant concentrations of S will lead to steadystate concentrations of the response element that are independent of the
level S. This analysis is valid when the system is stimulated by spatially
homogeneous source signal concentrations. To account for graded inputs,
the system is modified slightly. We assume that the concentrations of all
system species are localized except for the inhibitor, which is allowed to
diffuse. To account for this diffusion, we modify one term to the differential equation describing the inactivator dynamics, Eq. A3b,

⭸I共t, x兲
⫽ ⫺k⫺II共t, x兲 ⫹ kIS共t, x兲 ⫹ Dⵜ2I共t, x兲.
⭸t
For boundary conditions, we assume no flux at either end. Note that the
concentration of the inactivator is now indexed according to the spatial
dimension.
We model the cell as a one-dimensional system where the concentration
of the external signal varies linearly as the spatial parameter x. Thus S(x) ⫽
s0 ⫹ s1x. By solving the above equation, the steady-state concentration of
the inactivator enzyme can then be calculated as

I共x兲 ⫽

冉

冉

kI
sinh ␴x cosh ␴x关cosh ␴ ⫺ 1兴
s0 ⫹ s1 x ⫺
⫹
k⫺I
␴
␴ sinh ␴

冊冊

,

where ␴ ⫽ 公k⫺I/D. Because the activator enzyme cannot diffuse, its
steady-state concentration profile mirrors that of the external source,
A(x) ⫽ (kA/kA)S(x). Recall that the concentration of the response element
is governed by the ratio of these two enzymes, which is now A(x)/I(x), and
this equals

冉

冉

cosh ␴x关cosh ␴ ⫺ 1兴 sinh ␴x
⫺
␴ sinh ␴
␴

kAk⫺I
⬍
.
k⫺AkI

冊冊

⫺1

(A8)

It is the parameter ␴ that determines the spatial response of the system.
For small values of ␴, the concentration of I(x) is approximately constant
across the length of the cell. Hence, the ratio A(x)/I(x) mirrors that of the
external source. When ␴ is large, the concentration I(x) is linear across the
length of the cell, and hence the ratio of A(x)/I(x) is independent of the
spatial parameter x.
The output of a simulation involving the system in Fig. 3 B is shown in
Fig. 3, C–E. Parameters used are kA ⫽ 1 s⫺1, k⫺A ⫽ 1 s⫺1, kI ⫽ 0.05 s⫺1,
k⫺I ⫽ 0.05 s⫺1, k1 ⫽ 1 ␮M s⫺1, k*1 ⫽ 100 s⫺1, k⫺1 ⫽ 1 s⫺1, k2 ⫽ 1 ␮M⫺1
s⫺1, k⫺2 ⫽ 1 s⫺1, kM ⫽ 100 ␮M, and D ⫽ 0.8 ␮m2 s⫺1. As discussed with
regards to the system of Fig. 1 A, the property of perfect adaptation does
not depend on the value of the parameters chosen. The concentration of the
response element R*, which serves as the output of the first subsystem and
input to the second subsystem, has a steady-state value of 1 ␮M. The other
parameter values (k1, k1, k⫺1, k2, k⫺2, kM, and D) where chosen to provide
large amplification near this operating point. This is achieved by selecting
parameters so that the point of highest slope in Fig. 2 C matches the
concentration of the input of the second subsystem, R*.
Biophysical Journal 82(1) 50 – 63

Description of Model from Fig. 4 A
We assume a one-dimensional model of a cell, 10-␮m long. The differential equations describing our model are given below. Except for the
following two cases, the reactions are assumed to follow first-order kinetics. First, in the conversion of PI to PIP, and PIP to P2, the rate constants
k1 and k2 are augmented by terms proportional to the concentration of the
small G-protein; these are meant to express the increase in conversion that
is mediated by these proteins. Second, the conversion of P2 to P3 follows
Michaelis–Mentin quasi-steady-state dynamics. These assumptions lead to
the following set of differential equations:

⭸PI3K
⫽ ⫺k⫺KPI3K ⫹ kKG
⭸t
⭸PTEN
⫽ ⫺k⫺PPTEN ⫹ kPG ⫹ Dⵜ2PTEN
⭸t
⭸SGP
⫽ ⫺k⫺SSGP ⫹ kSPIP3
⭸t
⭸PIP
⫽ ⫺k⫺1PIP ⫹ 共k1 ⫹ k11SGP兲 ⫹ k⫺2P2
⭸t
⫺ 共k2 ⫹ k21SGP兲PIP
⭸P2
⫽ ⫺k⫺2P2 ⫹ 共k2 ⫹ k2SGP兲PIP ⫹ k⫺3PTEN 䡠 P3
⭸t

A共x兲 kAk⫺I
s1
⫽
1⫹
I共x兲 k⫺AkI
s 0 ⫹ s 1x
䡠

It is seen that the system adapts perfectly to homogeneous changes in
the concentration of the external signal S. Graded changes in S lead to
graded changes in both the concentrations of R* and R*1. However, as
expected from Eq. A8, the relative concentration gradient in R* is smaller
than that of S. However, the amplification subsystem involving R*1 leads to
large gradients in this molecule’s concentration, as seen in Fig. 3, D and E.
Varying parameters from these nominal values can have significant effects
on the magnitude of the response element R*1 (not shown).

⫺ k3PI3K

P2
1 ⫹ k31P2

⭸P3
P2
⫽ ⫺k⫺3PTEN 䡠 P3 ⫹ k3PI3K
⭸t
1 ⫹ k31P2
The analysis of this set of equations is similar to that of the previous
section. The only difference is that there are now two positive feedback
loops. Nevertheless, it is possible to show that, for spatially homogeneous
levels of G-protein signaling, the concentration of the signal P3 is independent on the level of concentration of G. For spatially graded inputs, the
spatial distribution of P3 depends on the spatially local ratio of concentrations of PI3K and PTEN. These spatial distributions are governed as in the
previous section. Note, however, that, for these spatially inhomogeneous
differences in concentrations to have the greatest effect on the distribution
of concentrations of P3, this ratio must lie in the transition region described
in Description of Models from Fig. 2. Kinetic constants used are found in
Table 1. These constants were chosen to give basal levels of PIP, P2, and
P3 around 50, 30, and 0.05 ␮M, which is in the range reported (Stenmark,
2000). The diffusion coefficient used corresponds to that predicted in
Postma and van Haastert (2001).
The authors gratefully acknowledge P. N. Devreotes, D. Bray, M. D. Levin
and D. A. Lauffenburger as well as the anonymous reviewers for their

Models of Eukaryotic Gradient Sensing
careful reading of the manuscript and for their helpful insights and suggestions.
Partial support for this work was provided by Burroughs Wellcome Fund’s
Fellowship in Computational Biology (Interfaces program at Caltech) to
A.L., the Whitaker Foundation (P.I.) and the National Science Foundation
(P.I.) under grant No. DMS-0083500.

REFERENCES
Ali, H., R. M. Richardson, B. Haribabu, and R. Snyderman. 1999. Chemoattractant receptor cross-desensitization. J. Biol. Chem. 274:
6027– 6030.
Alon, U., M. G. Surette, N. Barkai, and S. Leibler. 1999. Robustness in
bacterial chemotaxis. Nature. 397:168 –171.
Arkowitz, R. A. 1999. Responding to attraction: chemotaxis and chemotropism in Dictyostelium and yeast. Trends. Cell Biol. 9:20 –27.
Barkai, N., and S. Leibler. 1997. Robustness in simple biochemical networks. Nature. 387:913–917.
Blanchoin, L., T. D. Pollard, and R. D. Mullins. 2000. Interactions of
ADF/cofilin, Arp2/3 complex, capping protein and profilin in remodeling of branched actin filament networks. Curr. Biol. 10:1273–1282.
Czech, M. P. 2000. PIP2 and PIP3: complex roles at the cell surface. Cell.
100:603– 606.
Eddy, R. J., L. M. Pierini, F. Matsumura, and F. R. Maxfield. 2000.
Ca2⫹-dependent myosin II activation is required for uropod retraction
during neutrophil migration. J. Cell Sci. 113:1287–1298.
Gierer, A., and H. Meinhardt. 1972. A theory of biological pattern formation. Kybernetik. 12:30 –39.
Goldbeter, A., and D. E. Koshland. 1981. An amplified sensitivity arising
from covalent modification in biological systems. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 78:6840 – 6844.
Glogauer, M., J. Hartwig, and T. Stossel. 2000. Two pathways through
Cdc42 couple the N-formyl receptor to actin nucleation in permeabilized
human neutrophils. J. Cell Biol. 150:785–796.
Janetopoulos, C., T. Jin, and P. N. Devreotes. 2001. Receptor-mediated
activation of heterotrimeric G-proteins in living cells. Science. 291:
2408 –2411.
Jin, T., N. Zhang, Y. Long, C. A. Parent, and P. N. Devreotes. 2000.
Localization of the G protein ␤␥ complex in living cells during chemotaxis. Science. 287:1034 –1036.
Kim, J. Y., R. D. Soede, P. Schaap, R. Valkema, J. A. Borleis, P. J. Van
Haastert, P. N. Devreotes, and D. Hereld. 1997. Phosphorylation of
chemoattractant receptors is not essential for chemotaxis or termination
of G-protein-mediated responses. J. Biol. Chem. 272:27313–27318.
Knox, B. E., P. N. Devreotes, A. Goldbeter, and L. A. Segel. 1986. A
molecular mechanism for sensory adaptation based on ligand-induced
receptor modification. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 83:2345–2349.
Kobrinsky, E., T. Mirshahi, H. Zhang, T. Jin, and D. E. Logothetis. 2000.
Receptor-mediated hydrolysis of plasma membrane messenger PIP2
leads to K⫹-current desensitization. Nat. Cell Biol. 2:507–514.
Loyet, K. M., J. A. Kowalchyk, A. Chaudhary, J. Chen, G. D. Prestwich,
and T. F. Martin. 1998. Specific binding of phosphatidylinositol 4,5bisphosphate to calcium-dependent activator protein for secretion
(CAPS), a potential phosphoinositide effector protein for regulated exocytosis. J. Biol. Chem. 273:8337– 8343.

63
Meinhardt, H. 1999. Orientation of chemotactic cells and growth cones:
models and mechanisms. J. Cell Sci. 112:2867–2874.
Missy, K., V. Van Poucke, P. Raynal, C. Viala, G. Mauco, M. Plantavid,
H. Chap, and B. Payrastre. 1998. Lipid products of phosphoinositide
3-kinase interact with Rac1 GTPase and stimulate GDP dissociation.
J. Biol. Chem. 273:30279 –30286.
Neptune, E. R., and H. R. Bourne. 1997. Receptors induce chemotaxis by
releasing the ␤␥ subunit of Gi, not by activating Gq or Gs. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94:14489 –14494.
Oatey, P. B., K. Venkateswarlu, A. G. Williams, L. M. Fletcher, E. J.
Foulstone, P. J. Cullen, and J. M. Tavare. 1999. Confocal imaging of the
subcellular distribution of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate in
insulin- and PDGF-stimulated 3T3–L1 adipocytes. Biochem. J. 344:
511–518.
Parent, C. A., and P. N. Devreotes. 1999. A cell’s sense of direction.
Science. 284:765–770.
Postma, M., and P. J. van Haastert. 2001. A diffusion-translocation model
for gradient sensing by chemotactic cells. Biophys. J. 81:1314 –1323.
Pupillo, M., R. Insall, G. S. Pitt, and P. N. Devreotes. 1992. Multiple cyclic
AMP receptors are linked to adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium. Mol.
Biol. Cell. 3:1229 –1234.
Rickert, P., O. D. Weiner, F. Wang, H. R. Bourne, and G. Servant. 2000.
Leukocytes navigate by compass: roles of PI3K␥ and its lipid products.
Trends. Cell Biol. 10:466 – 473.
Servant, G., O. D. Weiner, P. Herzmark, T. Balla, J. W. Sedat, and H. R.
Bourne. 2000. Polarization of chemoattractant receptor signaling during
neutrophil chemotaxis. Science. 287:1037–1040.
Stenmark, H. 2000. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and membrane trafficking. In Biology of Phosphoinositides. S. Cockroft, editor. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. 32–108.
Stephens, L., A. McGregor, and P. Hawkins. 2000. Phosphoinositide
3-kinases: regulation by cell surface receptors and function of 3-phosphorylated lipids. In Biology of Phosphoinositides. S. Cockroft, editor.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. 32–108.
Tall, E. G., I. Spector, S. N. Pentyala, I. Bitter, and M. J. Rebecchi. 2000.
Dynamics of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate in actin-rich structures. Curr. Biol. 10:743–746.
Tang, Y., and H. G. Othmer. 1994. A G protein-based model of adaptation
in Dictyostelium discoideum. Math. Biosci. 120:25–76.
Traynor, D., J. L. Milne, R. H. Insall, and R. R. Kay. 2000. Ca(2⫹)
signalling is not required for chemotaxis in Dictyostelium. EMBO J.
19:4846 – 4854.
Van Duijn, B. and P. J. Van Haastert. 1992. Independent control of
locomotion and orientation during Dictyostelium discoideum chemotaxis. J. Cell Sci. 102:763–768.
Van Haastert, P. J. 1983. Sensory adaptation of Dictyostelium discoideum
cells to chemotactic signals. J. Cell Biol. 96:1559 –1565.
Vicker, M. G. 2000. Reaction-diffusion waves of actin filament
polymerization/depolymerization in Dictyostelium pseudopodium extension and cell locomotion. Biophys. Chem. 84:87–98.
Wu, D., C. K. Huang, and H. Jiang. 2000. Roles of phospholipid signaling
in chemoattractant-induced responses. J. Cell Sci. 113:2935–2940.
Yi, T. M., Y. Huang, M. I. Simon, and J. Doyle. 2000. Robust perfect
adaptation in bacterial chemotaxis through integral feedback control.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97:4649 – 4653.

Biophysical Journal 82(1) 50 – 63

