708

Research Paper

A novel Akt/PKB-related kinase is essential for morphogenesis
in Dictyostelium
Ruedi Meili, Charlene Ellsworth and Richard A. Firtel
Background: Dictyostelium Akt/PKB is homologous to mammalian Akt/PKB
and is required for cell polarity and proper chemotaxis during early
development. The kinase activity of Akt/PKB kinase is activated in response to
chemoattractants in neutrophils and in Dictyostelium by the chemoattractant
cAMP functioning via a pathway involving a heterotrimeric G protein and
PI3-kinase. Dictyostelium contains several kinases structurally related to
Akt/PKB, one of which, PKBR-1, is investigated here for its role in cell polarity,
movement and cellular morphogenesis during development.
Results: PKBR-1 has a kinase and a carboxy-terminal domain related to those
of Akt/PKB, but no PH domain. Instead, it has an amino-terminal myristoylation
site, which is required for its constitutive membrane localization. Like Akt/PKB,
PKBR-1 is activated by cAMP through a G-protein-dependent pathway, but
does not require PI3-kinase, probably because of the constitutive membrane
localization of PKBR-1. This is supported by experiments demonstrating the
requirement for membrane association for activation and in vivo function of
PKBR-1. PKBR-1 protein is found in all cells throughout early development but
is then restricted to the apical cells in developing aggregates, which are
thought to control morphogenesis. PKBR-1 null cells arrest development at the
mound stage and are defective in morphogenesis and multicellular
development. These phenotypes are complemented by Akt/PKB, suggesting
functional overlap between PKBR-1 and Akt/PKB. Akt/PKB PKBR-1 double
knockout cells exhibit growth defects and show stronger chemotaxis and
cell-polarity defects than Akt/PKB null cells.

Address: Section of Cell and Developmental
Biology, and Center for Molecular Genetics,
University of California, San Diego 9500, Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0634, USA.
Correspondence: Richard A. Firtel
E-mail: rafirtel@ucsd.edu
Received: 20 January 2000
Revised: 22 March 2000
Accepted: 14 April 2000
Published: 31 May 2000
Current Biology 2000, 10:708–717
0960-9822/00/$ – see front matter
© 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

Conclusions: Our results expand the previously known functions of Akt/PKB
family members in cell movement and morphogenesis during Dictyostelium
multicellular development. The results suggest that Akt/PKB and PKBR-1 have
overlapping effectors and biological function: Akt/PKB functions predominantly
during aggregation to control cell polarity and chemotaxis, whereas PKBR-1 is
required for morphogenesis during multicellular development.

Background
Akt/PKB is a serine/threonine protein kinase whose activity
is regulated by the phosphorylation of conserved residues in
the activation loop and carboxy-terminal tail [1,2]. Akt/PKB
activation is induced through the stimulation of Gprotein-coupled receptors and tyrosine kinases and
requires the function of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase
(PI3-kinase) [2–6]. Binding of the amino-terminal PH
domain of Akt/PKB to phosphoinositide products of PI3kinase (such as PI(3,4,5)P3) is thought to help localize
Akt/PKB to the plasma membrane [7–9], thereby facilitating its phosphorylation by PDK1, the kinase that phosphorylates Akt/PKB on the activation loop. Akt/PKB
when constitutively localized to the plasma membrane via
an amino-terminal myristoylation site is constitutively
active [1,10]. Dictyostelium Akt/PKB lacking the PH

domain is only inefficiently activated by upstream pathways
(R.M. and R.A.F., unpublished observations). In metazoans, Akt/PKB is involved in regulating cell size, cell and
organism survival, cell differentiation, apoptosis and
metabolic pathways [11–18].
When Dictyostelium amoebae are starved, they aggregate to
form a mound of up to 105 cells, which subsequently
develops into a spore-containing fruiting body. Aggregation is mediated by chemotaxis in response to cAMP, and
is activated through pathways activated by G-proteincoupled cAMP receptors [19,20]. We previously demonstrated that Dictyostelium Akt/PKB is required for cell
polarization and proper chemotaxis in response to cAMP
during aggregation of cells to form a multicellular organism [1]. Dictyostelium Akt/PKB kinase activity is transiently

Research Paper Akt/PKB-related kinase in Dictyostelium Meili et al.

stimulated by cAMP via a signaling pathway mediated by
a G-protein-coupled receptor and involving PI3-kinase.
The Akt/PKB PH domain fused to green fluorescent
protein (GFP) localizes to the plasma membrane in
response to cAMP stimulation and to the leading edge
during chemotaxis. These results suggest that Akt/PKB is
an important component of the signaling pathways that
control chemotaxis in Dictyostelium. Mammalian Akt/PKB
is also activated in response to fMet-Leu-Phe (fMLP) and
chemokines [21], and a GFP fusion with the Akt/PKB PH
domain localizes to the plasma membrane in neutrophils
in response to fMLP [22], suggesting a possible conserved
role for Akt/PKB in responding to chemoattractants [23].
Here, we describe the regulation and function of an
Akt/PKB-related kinase, PKBR-1, in Dictyostelium. PKBR-1
is highly homologous to Akt/PKB in the kinase and
carboxy-terminal extension but lacks the amino-terminal
PH domain. Instead, PKBR-1 is localized to the membrane
by myristoylation. PKBR-1 is not essential for aggregation
but is required during multicellular development for morphogenesis beyond the mound stage. Like Akt/PKB,
PKBR-1 is activated via a cAMP-mediated, G-proteincoupled pathway, which, in contrast to Akt/PKB activation, does not require PI3-kinase; however, like Akt/PKB,
membrane localization of PKBR-1 is essential. We
present results that suggest Akt/PKB and PKBR-1 serve
similar biological roles, with Akt/PKB functioning during
aggregation and PKBR-1 acting during mound formation
and morphogenesis.

Results
PKBR-1 structure and subcellular localization

A Dictyostelium PKBR-1 cDNA was cloned using
sequence information from previous PCR screens [24]
and GenBank (accession number M59744). A comparison
of the deduced PKBR-1 amino-acid sequence with Dictyostelium (GenBank U15210) and human Akt/PKB
(GenBank M63167) revealed a high degree of homology
in the kinase domain and the carboxy-terminal extension
(Figure 1a). PKBR-1 lacks the amino-terminal PH domain,
however. Instead, it has a consensus myristoylation site
(MGXXX(S/T)(K/R); single-letter amino-acid notation,
where X is any amino acid) followed by a cluster of basic
amino acids, a sequence motif that embodies a putative
membrane anchor [25,26]. The two regulatory Akt/PKB
phosphorylation sites [1,2] in the activation loop and carboxyl terminus (Ser473/Thr435) are conserved in
PKBR-1 (Thr309 and Thr470) and lie in a conserved
sequence context.
The presence of a consensus myristoylation site followed
by a cluster of basic amino acids is normally sufficient for
stable membrane association [25,26]. Using indirect
immunofluorescence, we examined the subcellular localization of PKBR-1 tagged at its carboxyl terminus with

709

the hemagglutinin (HA) epitope (PKBR-1–HA). As shown
in Figure 1b, PKBR-1–HA is associated with the plasma
membrane. When the myristoylation site is inactivated by
placing a Myc epitope at the amino terminus of the
protein (Myc–PKBR 1), membrane localization is lost and
the kinase appears to be found in small clusters or particles within the cytoplasm (Figure 1b). Membrane localization is restored when the c-Src myristoylation site with
its basic cluster [25,26] is fused to the PKBR-1 amino terminus (Myr–PKBR-1).
The chemoattractant cAMP activates PKBR-1 via a
G-protein-dependent, PI3-kinase-independent pathway

Dictyostelium Akt/PKB is activated in response to the
chemoattractant cAMP via a G-protein-dependent pathway
from the cAMP receptor that requires the function of PI3kinase [1]. To investigate whether PKBR-1 is similarly
activated, we stimulated aggregation-stage cells with
cAMP and PKBR-1 activity was assayed. Cells were lysed
at the times shown and PKBR-1 was isolated from these
lysates by immunoprecipitation with a polyclonal antibody
raised against a carboxy-terminal PKBR-1 peptide (see
Materials and methods). PKBR-1 kinase activity was
assayed using histone 2B as a substrate. For comparison,
we isolated Akt/PKB from the same lysates using a Dictyostelium Akt/PKB-specific antibody and assayed
Akt/PKB kinase activity as previously described [1]. As we
show in Figure 2a, the activation kinetics of the two
kinases are almost indistinguishable. There is rapid activation within 10–20 seconds and fast adaptation to basal
levels within 120 seconds. To confirm the specificity of
the assay for the respective kinases, we performed control
experiments using null strains for each kinase. As
expected, no Akt/PKB activity was observed in pkbA null
cells and no PKBR-1 activity was seen in pkbR1 null cells,
whereas pkbA null cells had cAMP-activated PKBR-1
activity and pkbR1 null cells had cAMP-activated Akt/PKB
activity (Figure 2a).
Akt/PKB activation in higher eukaryotes as well as in
Dictyostelium is mediated by PI3-kinases and their phosphoinositide products (see Introduction). We therefore
wanted to determine whether PI3-kinases are involved
in PKBR-1 activation. Maximal activation of Dictyostelium
Akt/PKB requires either of the genetically redundant
PI3-kinases [27] PIK1 and PIK2, which are most closely
related to the subfamily containing mammalian
p110α [27], but not PIK3, which is most closely related
to the PI3-kinase isoforms activated by Gβγ subunits [1].
To assess the role of PI3-kinase in PKBR-1 activation, we
used the PIK1/PIK2 double knockout cells (pik1–/pik2–
cells) and the PI3-kinase inhibitor LY294002 [28], which
inhibits cAMP-mediated activation of Akt/PKB [1]. As
previously shown, Akt/PKB activity is significantly
reduced in pik1–/pik2– cells (compare ‘WT’ lanes with

710

Current Biology Vol 10 No 12

Figure 1

Amino-acid sequence, domain structure and sequence features of
Dictyostelium PKBR-1 and its subcellular localization. (a) The
derived PKBR-1 sequence is aligned with Akt/PKB from
Dictyostelium and human cells. The kinase domain (gray
background) is highly conserved, followed by a well-conserved
‘extension’. There are two potential targets for regulatory

phosphorylation: Thr309 (gray bar in the activation loop of the kinase
domain) and Thr470 (black bar in the kinase extension). (b) Indirect
immunofluorescence showing subcellular localization of HA-tagged
wild-type PKBR-1 (PKBR-1–HA), a non-myristoylatable PKBR-1
(Myc–PKBR-1), and PKBR-1 fused with the c-Src membrane
anchor (Myr–PKBR-1).

‘PI3K 1/2 null’ lanes in Figure 2b) or when cells are pretreated for 60 seconds with 12.5 µM LY294002 (Figure 2b;
the western blot shows levels of Akt/PKB and PKBR-1
protein). In some experiments, the level of inhibition is
greater when pik1–/pik2– cells are pretreated with the
inhibitor (Figure 2b). This greater inhibition may be due
to the inhibition of residual PI3-kinase activity derived
from PIK3 or an unidentified PI3-kinase. In contrast,
PKBR-1 activation is not reduced in either of the double
knockout cells and/or in the presence of the inhibitor
(Figure 2b), indicating that PKBR-1 activation is independent of PI3-kinase (the Akt/PKB and PKBR-1 assays were
done on the same samples). To examine whether cAMPmediated PKBR-1 activation functions through a
G-protein-coupled pathway, as does cAMP activation of

Akt/PKB, we used a cell line in which the gene encoding
the sole Gβ subunit was disrupted but which constitutively
expressed the cAMP receptor cAR1 [1,29]. As depicted in
Figure 2c, cAR1-expressing, gβ null cells exhibit no
cAMP-mediated activation of PKBR-1 activity.
To determine whether the conserved Akt/PKB activation
sites in the activation loop and carboxy-terminal extension are important for PKBR-1 activation, we mutated
Thr309 and Thr470 to alanine (PKBR-1T309A,T470A).
PKBR-1T309A,T470A was expressed in pkbR1 null cells and
cAMP-mediated activation was assayed. We observed no
activity above the basal level (data not shown). Moreover,
PKBR-1T309A,T470A expressed in pkbR1 null cells is unable
to complement the null phenotype (see below). These

Research Paper Akt/PKB-related kinase in Dictyostelium Meili et al.

data are consistent with phosphorylation at these sites
being required for PKBR-1 activation.

711

Figure 2

PKBR-1 exhibits a temporally and spatially regulated pattern
of expression

PKBR-1 RNA blots show two developmentally regulated
transcripts (Figure 3a). The smaller mRNA species is found
at low levels during vegetative growth and is induced by
starvation at the onset of development, with transcript
levels peaking at 4–8 hours during the aggregation stage. By
8 hours of development, the larger transcript is induced and
peaks at the mound stage (12 hours), suggesting that
PKBR-1 transcription is regulated by two different pathways. Both mRNAs are derived from the same gene, as they
are both absent from pkbR1 null cells (data not shown).
In contrast to the mRNA, there is a single protein species.
The overall protein levels increase upon the initiation of
development and are maximal during aggregation, constent with the expression of the first transcript. Protein
levels then decrease ~2–3-fold and remain constant at this
level throughout the slug stage (Figure 3b). Examination
of the PKBR-1 expression pattern by immunohistochemistry reveals a switch from ubiquitous expression in all
cells during growth and aggregation in early development
to expression restricted to cells found at the top of the
mound during tip formation (data not shown). This
expression pattern is similar to that of ecmA, which is a
marker for the prestalkA cells that eventually form the
anterior 10% of the slug [30]. The appearance of the larger
mRNA species and the change to spatially restricted
protein expression occur at about the same time during
development, suggesting a possible causal relationship
between these two events.
pkbR1 null cells arrest at the mound stage

To investigate the role of PKBR-1, we generated a knockout strain by homologous recombination. No PKBR-1 gene
product was detectable on both mRNA and protein levels
(data not shown). pkbR1 null cells aggregate with kinetics
similar to those of the parental wild-type strain, forming a
tight aggregate around 10 hours of development
(Figure 4a). The subsequent development of pkbR1 null
mounds deviates markedly from that of wild-type mounds,
however; most pkbR1 null mounds arrest without forming a
tipped aggregate, whereas wild-type strains form fruiting
bodies by 25 hours (Figure 4a). Although most of the
mounds show no further morphogenesis, some mounds
round up and become almost spherical (Figure 4a, panel
‘pkbR1 null 50 h’). Depending on the conditions, some of
the mounds form an aberrant sorus atop an irregular stalklike structure without proceeding through the normal
intermediate stages. Dissection of the fruiting body-like
structures that form reveals mature spores and stalk cells;
however, these are less organized than in normal fruiting
bodies and no stalk tube is observed (data not shown).

Activation of PKBR-1 by the chemoattractant. (a) Wild-type (WT), pkbA
null and pkbR1 null aggregation-stage cells were stimulated with cAMP.
Samples were taken at the times indicated and PKBR-1 and Akt/PKB
kinase activity were visualized by autoradiography of an immunocomplex
in vitro kinase assay with histone 2B as substrate separated on
SDS–PAGE. (b) Kinase activation in response to cAMP stimulation in
wild-type (WT) and PI3K1/PI3K2 null cells (PI3K1/2) with or without a
60 sec pretreatment with 12.5 µM of the PI3-kinase inhibitor LY294002.
(The Akt/PKB and PKBR-1 assays were done on the same samples so
the relative effect of PI3-kinase can be compared.) (c) PKBR-1 kinase
activity in gβ null cells constitutively expressing the cAMP receptor
cAR1. See Materials and methods for details. (d) Activation of PKBR-1
(WT), Myr–PKBR-1 and Myc–PKBR-1 expressed in pkbR1 null cells
from the Act15 promoter. The upper panel shows the kinase activity.
The lower panel is a western blot and shows protein levels.

A pkbA/pkbR1 double knockout strain does not grow
axenically or aggregate

Because of the structural similarity of PKBR-1 to Akt/PKB,
we investigated the impact of the absence of both kinases
on Dictyostelium growth and development. As described
previously, Akt/PKB (pkbA) null cells do not polarize properly in a chemoattractant gradient, move slowly, and do not
aggregate at lower cell densities, densities at which the
parental strain aggregates normally [1]. However, pkbA null
cells exhibit no obvious growth defects and multicellular
aggregates form normal fruiting bodies.
We generated a PKBR-1 Akt/PKB double knockout
strain (pkbR1/pkbA null cells, see Materials and methods).

712

Current Biology Vol 10 No 12

Figure 3

Temporal expression pattern of Dictyostelium pkbR1 and
cell-type-specific genes during development. (a) Northern blot
analysis of pkbR1 RNA during development. (b) Western blot
analysis of PKBR-1 protein using an antibody raised against the
carboxyl terminus. (c) RNA blot analysis examining responsiveness to
cAMP of the wild-type (WT), pkbA null (pkbA–), pkbR1 null (pkbR1–)

and double knockout (Double) cells. Top two rows: RNA was
isolated from log-phase vegetative cells (Veg) or from cells pulsed
for 5 h with 30 nM cAMP (cAMP) and probed for the pulse-induced
genes cAR1 and csA. Bottom row: for the post-aggregative gene
CP2, RNA from cells pulsed for 5 h and then given high cAMP
(300 µM) was used.

It became apparent that disruption of both genes
severely impairs cell growth under axenic conditions,
even when the cells grow attached to plastic Petri dishes.
To isolate clones and grow pkbR1/pkbA null cells, it was
necessary to supplement the axenic medium with bacteria (Klebsiella aerogenes). When we examined the developmental potential of pkbR1/pkbA null cells, no aggregation
occurred and the cells remained in a monolayer indefinitely (Figure 4b, and data not shown). Re-expression of
Akt/PKB under the control of an Act15 promoter partially
rescues the developmental defect, allowing aggregation

and formation of smaller than wild-type mounds, most of
which arrest at this stage (Figure 4b).
To determine whether the double null cells are either
unable to detect the developmental signals or cannot
respond chemotactically, we assayed the ability of the
double null cells to respond to cAMP signaling by examining cAMP-mediated gene expression and the ability of
‘aggregation-competent’ double null cells pulsed for
5 hours with cAMP (to maximize expression of the signaling components required for responses to cAMP [1,29],

Figure 4
Developmental phenotype of the pkbR1 single
knockout and pkbR1/pkbA double knockout.
(a) Developmental morphology of wild-type
(left panels) and pkbR1 null cells (right
panels) at the mound stage (11 h) and at the
terminal stage of development (25 h for
wild-type cells; 50 h for pkbR1 null cells). The
inset illustrates the range of terminal
structures formed by the knockout strain.
(b) Aggregation-deficient phenotype of
pkbR1/pkbA double knockout cells after 28 h
(upper panel). Partial complementation was
achieved by re-expression of Akt/PKB from
the Act15 promoter (lower panel).

Research Paper Akt/PKB-related kinase in Dictyostelium Meili et al.

713

Figure 5
Chemotaxis of wild-type and pkbR1 null cells.
Cells were pulsed for 5 h with 30 nM cAMP
every 6 min to induce cAMP receptors and
other components of the cAMP chemotaxis
pathway and plated on a glass coverslip
covering a hole in a small plastic Petri dish.
Chemotaxis of the cells to a micropipette
containing 150 µM cAMP was assayed as
previously described [1]. The cells were
visualized on a Nikon microscope with
differential interference contrast imaging as
described in the Materials and methods and
analyzed using the DIAS program [38]. The
double knockout cells exhibit a speed of
1.4 ± 0.3 µM/min, wild-type cells showed a
mean speed of 8.9 ±1.0 µM/min, and the
pkbA null cells exhibited a mean speed of
3.3 ± 0.3 µM/min.

see below) to undergo chemotaxis towards cAMP emitted
from a micropipette. Figure 3c shows the expression in
wild-type, pkbA null, pkbR1 null, and the double knockout cells of the aggregation-stage genes encoding the
cAMP receptor cAR1 and the cell adhesion protein
contact sites A (CsA) in response to 30 nM pulses of
cAMP, a signal that mimics cAMP signaling during aggregation [29]. All four strains showed a similar induction of
cAR1 expression. The expression of CsA, which is dependent on cAR1 expression and pathways regulated through
cAR1, is similar in wild-type cells and the single knockout strains, but is reduced in the double null cells. We
also examined the expression of CP2, a gene induced by
high levels of cAMP at the mound stage via a cAR1dependent pathway. The expression level in the double
knockout cells is slightly reduced compared to that in the
other three strains. These results indicate that the double
knockout cells can respond to cAMP signals, but at a level
that is slightly reduced compared with either null strain or
wild-type cells.
As shown in Figure 5, the double knockout cells undergo
chemotaxis, but at a significantly reduced rate compared
with either the wild-type or pkbR1 null cells (which show
normal chemotaxis, data not shown). The rate is also
reduced compared to pkbA null cells, which already
exhibit a significantly reduced rate of chemotaxis and cell
polarization compared to wild type ([1], and see legend to
Figure 5). In addition, pkbR1/pkbA null cells undergoing
chemotaxis do not polarize (Figure 5, inset; compare with

inset of wild-type cells). This defect is not unexpected,
considering the polarization defect of pkbA null cells [1].
The growth and aggregation defects and more severe
chemotaxis deficiencies of pkbR1/pkbA null cells compared
with pkbA null cells suggest that PKBR-1 and Akt/PKB
may co-regulate multiple pathways and there may be
some functional redundancy between the genes. We note
that the double knockout cells exhibit strong growth
defects and thus the reduced response of these cells to
cAMP signaling could be due to pleiotropic effects of the
growth defects or actual defects in the response pathways.
Expression of either PKBR-1 or Akt/PKB can complement
the mound-arrest pkbR1 null phenotype

The hallmarks of pkbR1 null strain development are
mound arrest, the absence of a slug stage for those aggregates that develop further, and formation of a few, aberrant, fruiting bodies. pkbA null cells, on the other hand,
exhibit aggregation-stage defects, with the aggregates that
form producing normal fruiting bodies [1]. Akt/PKB
protein is preferentially expressed during growth and
aggregation [1] and becomes undetectable at the mound
stage, the time at which pkbR1 null strain developmental
defects are first observed. One explanation for this is that
PKBR-1 function is mostly redundant in the presence of
Akt/PKB protein but becomes essential after the disappearance of Akt/PKB protein.
To test this hypothesis, we expressed Akt/PKB or
PKBR-1 in pkbR1 null cells from the constitutive Act15

714

Current Biology Vol 10 No 12

Figure 6
Development of PKBR-1 mutant strains.
(a) The developmental phenotypes of pkbR1
null strains expressing PKBR-1, Akt/PKB, a
kinase-inactive mutant of PKBR-1
(PKBR-1K182M) and a non-myristoylatable
mutant (Myc–PKBR-1) at either 15 h (slug
stage) or 25 h (terminal development).
Expression from the Act15 and GFP
promoters are shown for Akt/PKB and
PKBR-1. (b) pkbR1 null cells expressing GFP
under the control of the Act15 promoter were
mixed with wild-type (KAx-3) cells in a ratio of
1:10 and plated for development. Structures
are visualized by admixing some visible light to
show nonfluorescent cells more clearly.

promoter and the GBF promoter, which is preferentially
induced after aggregation [31] (J. Brown and R.A.F.,
unpublished observations). Clones were selected and their
development analyzed. Strains expressing PKBR-1 from
the GBF promoter (GBF–PKBR-1) develop like the wildtype Dictyostelium parental strain, proceeding through a
slug stage to the formation of well-proportioned fruiting
bodies (Figure 6a). Strains expressing Akt/PKB from the
Act15 (Act15–Akt/PKB) or GBF promoter exhibit almost
normal development, with a slug stage and formation of
fruiting bodies, although the slugs and the fruiting bodies
do not appear completely normal (Figure 6a, data for GBF
promoter not shown). A putative kinase-dead mutant of
PKBR-1 (Act15/PKBR-1K182M), which has lysine in the
ATP-binding site mutated to methionine, is unable to
restore development (Figure 6a). These cells aggregate
abnormally and form very small mounds which arrest at
this stage, suggesting that the kinase-dead PKBR-1 functions as a dominant-negative during aggregation and may
affect Akt/PKB as well as PKBR-1 function. Consistent
with this, expression of this construct in wild-type cells
resulted in a similar phenotype (data not shown). Likewise, expression of a mutant lacking the amino-terminal
myristoylation site (Act15–Myc–PKBR-1) does not restore
normal development, although expression of a mutant in
which the native myristoylation site is replaced with the
one from c-Src (Act15–Myr–PKBR-1) does (Figure 6a),
indicating that PKBR-1 membrane localization is required
for in vivo function.
To determine the ability of the amino-terminally tagged
Myc– and Myr–proteins to be activated, we repeated the
kinase activation experiments with pkbR1 null strains

constitutively expressing Myr–PKBR-1 and Myc–PKBR-1
at approximately the same levels as endogenous PKBR-1
is expressed in wild-type cells (Figure 2d). As shown,
Myr–PKBR-1 but not Myc–PKBR-1 is activated, suggesting that activation requires the protein to be membrane
localized. The level of activation of Myr–PKBR-1 is
approximately a third to a half that of endogenous
PKBR-1 expressed at approximately the same levels in
wild-type cells. This reduced activation may result from
structural changes in the protein that may stem from the
added amino-terminal domain.
PKBR-1 knockout cells exhibit patterning defects in
chimeras with wild-type cells

The mound-arrest phenotype of the pkbR1 null strain could
indicate that these cells have either a cell movement defect,
a defect in cell-type differentiation, or a combination of
both. To examine if cell-type-specific gene expression is
induced in pkbR1 null mounds, we probed developmental
RNA blots with the prestalk-specific and prespore-specific
genes ecmA and SP60/cotC [19,32]. Both genes are induced
in pkbR1 null cells with kinetics similar to those of induction and expression in wild-type cells, indicating that pkbR1
null cells are able to induce cell-type differentiation (data
not shown), although the level of expression is reduced.
This is probably a result of the pkbR1 null cells arresting at
the mound stage, which is before the maximal level of ecmA
and SP60/cotC expression is reached in wild-type strains.
We cannot, however, exclude a direct role for PKBR-1 in
maximal expression of these genes.
To follow movement and position of pkbR1 null cells
during morphogenesis, we tagged these cells by expressing

Research Paper Akt/PKB-related kinase in Dictyostelium Meili et al.

GFP under the control of the Act15 promoter and allowed
them to form chimeric aggregates with wild-type cells. In
aggregation streams, pkbR1 null cells participate normally
in aggregate formation (Figure 6b), suggesting that there is
no cell movement defect at this stage. Moreover, the pkbR1
null cells have a normal elongated shape, suggesting that
they are not defective in cell polarization at this stage of
development. The formation of the anterior–posterior axis
and spatial patterning of cell types in Dictyostelium result
from a differential sorting of prestalk cells to the apical tip
to form a discrete anterior prestalk domain [19,30,32]. But
while the distribution of the pkbR1 null cells remains
uniform in early mounds (data not shown), the null cells
are not found in the tip or in the resulting anterior prestalk
domain in the slug (Figure 6b, data not shown). pkbR1 null
cells form spores and are part of the basal disc but are not
found in the stalk (data not shown).

Discussion
Regulation and localization of PKBR-1

PKBR-1 is highly homologous to Akt/PKB, including the
presence of the two conserved phosphorylation sites
required for kinase activation. Alanine substitutions at
these sites abolish cAMP-mediated activation of PKBR-1.
A major difference between PKBR-1 and Akt/PKB is the
absence of a PH domain and the presence of a myristoylation site in PKBR-1. This myristoylation site is required
for constitutive localization of PKBR-1 on the plasma
membrane, cAMP-mediated activation of PKBR-1, and
the ability of PKBR-1 to complement the pkbR1 null phenotype, and can be replaced by the c-Src amino-terminal
myristoylation site. The requirement for membrane localization for PKBR-1 activation and function is consistent
with the requirement for the PH domain and membrane
localization for Akt/PKB activation.
Our results suggest that some aspects of the activation
pathway are conserved between PKBR-1 and Akt/PKB,
including activation in response to cAMP via a heterotrimeric G-protein-dependent pathway with similar
kinetics, and the requirement of the conserved consensus
sites for phosphorylation. Unlike Akt/PKB, however,
PKBR-1 activation does not require PI3-kinase. This is
not so surprising, as PKBR-1 has a myristoylation site
which functions as a constitutive membrane-localization
signal. Interestingly, the addition of an amino-terminal
myristoylation signal from c-Src to either bona fide mammalian or Dictyostelium Akt/PKB, but not PKBR-1, results
in a constitutively active kinase [1,10]. It has been proposed that Akt/PKB is held in an inactive state through a
negative regulatory function of the PH domain and that
binding of the PH domain to the PI3-kinase product
PI(3,4,5)P3 in the plasma membrane results in the localization of the protein to the plasma membrane. This possibly causes a conformational change in the protein [33]
and allows access to PDK1 (or the equivalent kinase in

715

Dictyostelium). Dictyostelium Akt/PKB either lacking the
PH domain or containing a point mutation in the PH
domain which abrogates its ability to translocate to the
plasma membrane in response to cAMP signaling, shows
significantly reduced cAMP-mediated activation (R.M.
and R.A.F., unpublished observations), which is consistent with a requirement for membrane localization for
activation. An amino-terminal myristoylation site would
place Akt/PKB constitutively at the membrane, where
basal levels of phospholipids might release the negative
inhibition, allowing PDK1 to have access to Akt/PKB. As
PKBR-1 is not activated by constitutive membrane localization, it is possible that the amino-terminal domain of
PKBR-1 may be an inhibitory domain similar to the PH
domain, but one not regulated by phospholipids. We
suggest that in Dictyostelium, and possibly in metazoans,
there are two upstream regulatory pathways for Akt/PKB:
a PI3-kinase-dependent pathway that controls plasma
membrane localization, and a distinct PI3-kinase-independent pathway that regulates kinase phosphorylation
and activation.
Function of PKBR-1 and redundancy with Akt/PKB

PKBR-1 protein is present throughout growth and development, with levels increasing upon starvation and being
maximal during aggregation. Protein levels then decrease
~2–3 fold, at the time that expression of the gene from a
second promoter is induced by cAMP signaling. This corresponds temporally with a change in the expression
pattern of the protein. Initially, all cells have a similar
level of PKBR-1 protein, as determined by in situ staining;
during tip formation, however, cells expressing PKBR-1
are spatially restricted to a subpopulation of cells at the
top of the mound. This restriction is similar to that
observed with some prestalk-specific proteins [32]. Thus,
the reduction in the level of PKBR-1 as the mound forms
coincides with the loss of the protein in the cells that will
not be forming the tip. In Dictyostelium, spatial patterning is
established, in part, through the differential sorting of prestalk cells to the apex of the mound, forming the tip [19,32].
Because of the changes in protein levels and the distribution of PKBR-1-expressing cells in the mound, we suggest
that the protein expressed during early development is
turned over in all cells, or possibly only in cells that will
not sort to form the tip. New PKBR-1 protein would then
be expressed in this tip cell population from the late promoter. This shift from the presence of PKRB-1 in all cells
to the localization of the protein only in prestalk cells,
which form the tip and represent ~20% of the organism,
presumably accounts for the reduced levels of this protein
in the whole organism at the mound stage. As the cells
that preferentially have PKBR-1 in the mound are those
that have started to form the tip, and which extend to form
a standing finger, we suggest that potential cell motility or
polarity defects of pkbR1 null cells are responsible for the
mound-arrest phenotype.

716

Current Biology Vol 10 No 12

The first observed developmental defect of pkbR1 null
cells is the mound-arrest phenotype. In chimeric organisms
containing predominantly wild-type cells, pkbR1 null cells
are uniformly distributed during aggregation and in the
early mound. As cell sorting starts to form the apical, anterior prestalk domain, pkbR1 null cells do not participate,
however. These results, combined with the observation
that these cells can induce prestalk and prespore genes, are
consistent with a defect in the ability of these cells to sort
and form this developing tissue, rather than to a defect in
the ability of the cells to induce prestalk cells. Several other
mutant strains with known cell movement defects have a
similar phenotype, including strains in which the genes
encoding myosin II, myosin regulatory light chain and the
LIM domain protein LIM2 have been disrupted [34–37].
As pkbA null cells have polarity defects during aggregation,
it is possible that the morphogenesis defect of the pkbR1
null strain is due to defects in cell movement at this stage
of development. pkbR1 null cells do not exhibit polarity
defects in aggregation streams. A role for PKBR-1 in controlling cell movement and polarity is, however, supported
by the strong chemotaxis and polarity defects exhibited by
the PKBR-1 and Akt/PKB double knockout strain, which
are presumably masked in the pkbR1 single knockout by
the presence of Akt/PKB. The severe growth and aggregation defects exhibited by the double null strain are consistent with PKBR-1 functioning at these stages of the life
cycle and with PKBR-1 and Akt/PKB being at least partially redundant. Our results suggest that at least one of the
kinases must be present for the cells to aggregate.
We also demonstrate that Akt/PKB can complement most
of the morphogenetic phenotypes of pkbR1 null cells. This
is consistent with PKBR-1 and Akt/PKB having at least
some overlapping functions and common downstream substrates. We also demonstrate that expression of a potential
dominant-negative, kinase-dead form of PKBR-1 in wildtype cells results in aggregation defects, possibly due to the
inhibition of Akt/PKB as well as PKBR-1 function. This is
also consistent with PKBR-1 and Akt/PKB having common
substrates. The expression patterns of PKBR-1 and
Akt/PKB and the phenotypes of single and double knockout strains suggest that whereas Akt/PKB and PKBR-1 have
overlapping functions during early development, PKBR-1
provides a unique function in the multicellular stages, when
Akt/PKB protein is no longer present. If Akt/PKB and
PKBR-1 have overlapping functions, why do akt/pkb null
cells exhibit aggregation-stage polarization and chemotaxis
defects? One possible reason is that PKBR-1 may not effectively interact with all the Akt/PKB substrates, as PKBR-1
is membrane-tethered. Alternatively, this difference may
result from the uniform localization of PKBR-1 around the
plasma membrane. We have shown that the PH domain of
Akt/PKB is preferentially localized at the leading edge of
cells undergoing chemotaxis and suggested that this leading
edge localization and activation of Akt/PKB may have an

important function in regulating cell polarization in a
chemoattractant gradient [1]. Myristoylated PKBR-1 may
not be able to provide this localized function. Moreover,
when myristoylated Akt/PKB is expressed during aggregation, the cells show a loss of cell polarization similar to that
observed for pkbA null cells [1]. One explanation is that a
myristoylated protein is not locally activated at the leading
edge, which may be important for the function of Akt/PKB.
Our results do not explain why PKBR-1, a novel form of
Akt/PKB with an amino-terminal myristoylation site but
lacking a PH domain, would have evolved to function
during the multicellular stages of development. We expect
that the regulatory circuitry that controls Akt/PKB and
PKBR-1 activation is optimized in the multicellular stages
by using a different amino-terminal regulatory domain,
which may involve differences in the activation pathway.

Materials and methods
Antibodies
A rabbit polyclonal anti-Dictyostelium PKBR-1 antibody was raised
against the carboxy-terminal peptide CGADSILKD coupled via the cysteine to bovine serum albumin (BSA). An affinity resin was prepared as
follows: a HincII/XhoI cDNA fragment coding for the carboxyl terminus
of PKBR-1 was expressed as a glutathione-S-transferase (GST) fusion
protein in Escherichia coli, purified by glutathione affinity chromatography according to the manufacturer’s (Pharmacia) instructions, and
coupled to Affigel10 (BioRad) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Affinity purification was essentially performed as described for the rabbit
polyclonal anti-Dictyostelium Akt/PKB antibody [1]. Rabbit polyclonal
anti-HA-tag antibody was purchased from Santa Cruz and mouse monoclonal anti-c-Myc antibody (9E10) was obtained from Invitrogen.

Molecular biochemistry and cell biology
A full-length pkbR1 cDNA clone was obtained by screening a 12–16 h
developmental λZAP library [31] with a probe amplified from genomic
DNA by PCR. Epitope-tagged versions of PKBR-1 were made by PCR
by amplifying the appropriate regions of the pkbR1 cDNA with primers
containing the necessary sequences. The nucleotide sequence of all
amplified DNA and the final constructs were confirmed by DNA
sequence. A pkbr1 knockout construct was made by inserting the blasticidin-resistance cassette into a BamHI site created at base 484 of the
pkbR1 cDNA by a PCR-based approach as described previously [1].
Randomly selected clones were screened for gene disruption by Southern blot analysis. Two independent clones were chosen for further analysis. To make a pkbA/pkbr1 double knockout strain, pkbr1 was first
knocked out in Dictyostelium JH10 cells using the Thy1 expression cassette using the approaches described previously [1]. The double knockout cells grow only in the presence of bacteria. They were either
propagated on bacterial lawns or in HL5 axenic medium supplemented
with 5% of a K. aerogenes overnight culture. Western blot analysis was
done as previously described [1]. PKBR-1 kinase assay was performed
using an essentially identical protocol to that described previously for
Dictyostelium Akt/PKB. Aggregation-competent cells were prepared by
pulsing washed log-phase vegetative cells for 5 h with 30 nM cAMP
every 10 min as described [1,29]. After bubbling the cells to reduce
basal kinase activities [1,29], they were stimulated with cAMP (100 nM
final concentration). Cell lysis, sample preparation and the kinase assay
were as previously described for Akt/PKB [1], except that a PKBR-1-specific antibody was used to immunoprecipitate PKBR-1 from the lysates.

Plating cells for development and in situ staining
Exponentially growing cells were harvested and washed twice with
12 mM Na/K phosphate buffer pH 6.1 and plated on Na/K phosphate
agar plates at a density of 4 × 106 cells/cm2. Mixed cell populations of
1 part pkbr1 cells tagged with Act15–GFP and 9 parts wild-type cells

Research Paper Akt/PKB-related kinase in Dictyostelium Meili et al.

were plated in the same way. For in situ staining, cells were developed on filters and fixed in Z-buffer (60 mM Na2HPO4, 40 mM
NaH2PO4, 10 mM KCl, 1 mM MgSO4) containing 0.5% glutaraldehyde and 0.1% Nonidet-P40 for 10 min. The filters were blocked for
1 h with 2% gelatin in TBS (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl),
washed briefly with TTBS (TBS + 0.05% Tween 20) and incubated
with the primary antibody in 1% gelatin TTBS for 1 h. All further incubation steps were done using the reagents from the Vectastain Elite
ABC kit (Vector Laboratories) in 1% gelatin TTBS according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The substrate for color development was
Fast Red from Sigma. Chemotaxis assays and image acquisition were
done as previously described [1].

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank members of the Firtel laboratory for their suggestions during the course of this work and Jennifer Roth for editing the manuscript. Ruedi Meili was supported, in part, by a postdoctoral fellowship from
the Schweizerische Krebsliga Projekt BIL SKL 411-1-1997. This research
was supported by USPHS grants to R.A.F.

References
1. Meili R, Ellsworth C, Lee S, Reddy TB, Ma H, Firtel RA:
Chemoattractant-mediated transient activation and membrane
localization of Akt/PKB is required for efficient chemotaxis to
cAMP in Dictyostelium. EMBO J 1999, 18:2092-2105.
2. Alessi D, Andjelkovic M, Caudwell B, Cron P, Morrice N, Cohen P,
Hemmings B: Mechanism of activation of protein kinase B by
insulin and IGF-1. EMBO J 1996, 15:6541-6551.
3. King WG, Mattaliano MD, Chan TO, Tsichlis PN, Brugge JS:
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase is required for integrin-stimulated
AKT and Raf-1/mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway
activation. Mol Cell Biol 1997, 17:4406-4418.
4. Murga C, Laguinge L, Wetzker R, Cuadrado A, Gutkind J: Activation
of Akt/protein kinase B by G protein-coupled receptors. J Biol
Chem 1998, 273:19080-19085.
5. Franke T, Yang S, Chan T, Datta K, Kazlauskas A, Morrison D, et al.:
The protein kinase encoded by the Akt proto-oncogene is a
target of the PDGF-activated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Cell
1995, 81:727-736.
6. Burgering B, Coffer P: Protein kinase B (c-Akt) in
phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase signal transduction. Nature
1995, 376:599-602.
7. Andjelkovic M, Alessi D, Meier R, Fernandez A, Lamb N, Frech M, et al.:
Role of translocation in the activation and function of protein
kinase B. J Biol Chem 1997, 272:31515-31524.
8. Frech M, Andjelkovich M, Ingley E, Reddy K, Falck J, Hemmings B: High
affinity binding of inositol phosphatase and phosphoinositides to
the pleckstrin homology domain of RAC/protein kinase B and their
influence on kinase activity. J Biol Chem 1997, 272:8474-8481.
9. Klippel A, Kavanaugh W, Pot D, Williams L: A specific product of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase directly activates the protein kinase
Akt through its pleckstrin homology domain. Mol Cell Biol 1997,
17:338-344.
10. Kohn A, Summers S, Birnbaum M, Roth R: Expression of a
constitutively active Akt Ser/Thr kinase in 3T3-L1 adipocytes
stimulates glucose uptake and glucose transporter 4
translocation. J Biol Chem 1996, 271:31372-31378.
11. Datta SR, Brunet A, Greenberg ME: Cellular survival: a play in three
Akts. Genes Dev 1999, 13:2905-2927.
12. Rommel C, Clarke BA, Zimmermann S, Nunez L, Rossman R, Reid K,
et al.: Differentiation stage-specific inhibition of the raf-MEK-ERK
pathway by Akt. Science 1999, 286:1738-1741.
13. Cross D, Alessi D, Cohen P, Anjelkovich M, Hemmings B: Inhibition
of glycogen synthase kinase-3 by insulin mediated by protein
kinase B. Nature 1995, 378:785-789.
14. Zimmermann S, Moelling K: Phosphorylation and regulation of raf
by akt (protein kinase B). Science 1999, 286:1741-1744.
15. Cardone MH, Roy N, Stennicke HR, Salvesen GS, Franke TF,
Stanbridge E, et al.: Regulation of cell death protease caspase-9
by phosphorylation. Science 1998, 282:1318-1321.
16. del Peso L, Gonzalez-Garcia M, Page C, Herrera R, Nunez G:
Interleukin-3-induced phosphorylation of BAD through the
protein kinase Akt. Science 1997, 278:687-689.
17. Lin K, Dorman JB, Rodan A, Kenyon C: daf-16: An HNF-3/forkhead
family member that can function to double the life-span of
Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 1997, 278:1319-1322.

717

18. Ogg S, Paradis S, Gottlieb S, Patterson GI, Lee L, Tissenbaum HA,
Ruvkun G: The Fork head transcription factor DAF-16 transduces
insulin-like metabolic and longevity signals in C. elegans. Nature
1997, 389:994-999.
19. Aubry L, Firtel RA: Integration of signaling networks that regulate
Dictyostelium differentiation. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1999,
15:469-517.
20. Parent CA, Devreotes PN: Molecular genetics of signal transduction
in Dictyostelium. Annu Rev Biochem 1996, 65:411-440.
21. Tilton B, Andjelkovic M, Didichenko SA, Hemmings BA, Thelen M:
G-Protein-coupled receptors and Fcgamma-receptors mediate
activation of Akt/protein kinase B in human phagocytes. J Biol
Chem 1997, 272:28096-28101.
22. Servant G, Weiner O, Herzmark P, Balla T, Sedat J, Bourne H:
Polarization of chemoattractant receptor signaling during neutrophil
chemotaxis. Science 2000, 287:1037-1040.
23. Watton S, Downward J: Akt/PKB localisation and 3′
phosphoinositide generation at sites of epithelial cell-matrix and
cell-cell interaction. Curr Biol 1999, 9:433-436.
24. Mann SK, Firtel RA: A developmentally regulated, putative
serine/threonine protein kinase is essential for development in
Dictyostelium. Mech Dev 1991, 35:89-101.
25. Buser C, Sigal C, Resh M, McLaughlin S: Membrane binding of
myristylated peptides corresponding to the NH2 terminus of Src.
Biochemistry 1994, 33:13093-13101.
26. Sigal C, Zhou W, Buser C, McLaughlin S, Resh M: Amino-terminal
basic residues of Src mediate membrane binding through
electrostatic interaction with acidic phospholipids. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1994, 91:12253-12257.
27. Zhou KM, Takegawa K, Emr SD, Firtel RA: A phosphatidylinositol
(PI) kinase gene family in Dictyostelium discoideum: biological
roles of putative mammalian p110 and yeast Vps34p PI 3-kinase
homologs during growth and development. Mol Cell Biol 1995,
15:5645-5656.
28. Vlahos CJ, Matter W, Hui KY, Brown RF: A specific inhibitor of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, 2-(4-morpholinyl)-8-phenyl-4H-1benzopyran-4-one (LY294002). J Biol Chem 1994, 269:5241-5248.
29. Insall RH, Soede RDM, Schaap P, Devreotes PN: Two cAMP
receptors activate common signaling pathways in Dictyostelium.
Mol Biol Cell 1994, 5:703-711.
30. Abe T, Early A, Siegert F, Weijer C, Williams J: Patterns of cell
movement within the Dictyostelium slug revealed by cell
type-specific, surface labeling of living cells. Cell 1994, 77:687-699.
31. Schnitzler GR, Fischer WH, Firtel RA: Cloning and characterization
of the G-box binding factor, an essential component of the
developmental switch between early and late development in
Dictyostelium. Genes Dev 1994, 8:502-514.
32. Williams J: Prestalk and stalk heterogeneity in Dictyostelium. In
Dictyostelium - A Model System for Cell and Developmental Biology.
Edited by Maeda Y, Inouye K, Takeuchi I. Tokyo: Universal Academy
Press; 1997:293-304.
33. Kandel E, Hay N: The regulation and activities of the multifunctional
serine/threonine kinase Akt/PKB. Exp Cell Res 1999, 253:210-229.
34. Chen TL, Wolf WA, Chisholm RL: Cell-type-specific rescue of
myosin function during Dictyostelium development defines two
distinct cell movements required for culmination. Development
1998, 125:3895-3903.
35. Traynor D, Tasaka M, Takeuchi I, Williams J: Aberrant pattern
formation in myosin heavy chain mutants of Dictyostelium.
Development 1994, 120:591-601.
36. Eliott S, Joss GH, Spudich A, Williams KL: Patterns in Dictyostelium
discoideum — the role of myosin-II in the transition from the
unicellular to the multicellular phase. J Cell Sci 1993, 104:457-466.
37. Chien S, Chung CY, Sukumaran S, Osborne N, Lee S, Ellsworth C,
et al.: The Dictyostelium LIM domain-containing protein LIM2 is
essential for proper chemotaxis and morphogenesis. Mol Biol
Cell 2000, 11:1275-1291.
38. Wessels D, Voss E, Von Bergen N, Burns R, Stites J, Soll DR:
A computer-assisted system for reconstructing and interpreting
the dynamic three-dimensional relationships of the outer surface,
nucleus and pseudopods of crawling cells. Cell Motil Cytoskel
1998, 41:225-246.

