The EMBO Journal Vol.18 No.8 pp.2092–2105, 1999

Chemoattractant-mediated transient activation and
membrane localization of Akt/PKB is required for
efﬁcient chemotaxis to cAMP in Dictyostelium

Ruedi Meili, Charlene Ellsworth, Susan Lee,
T.B.K.Reddy, Hui Ma and Richard A.Firtel1
Department of Biology, Center for Molecular Genetics, Room 225,
University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla,
CA 92093-0634, USA
1Corresponding author
e-mail: rafirtel@ucsd.edu

Chemotaxis-competent cells respond to a variety of
ligands by activating second messenger pathways leading to changes in the actin/myosin cytoskeleton and
directed cell movement. We demonstrate that Dictyostelium Akt/PKB, a homologue of mammalian Akt/
PKB, is very rapidly and transiently activated by the
chemoattractant cAMP. This activation takes place
through G protein-coupled chemoattractant receptors
via a pathway that requires homologues of mammalian
p110 phosphoinositide-3 kinase. pkbA null cells exhibit
aggregation-stage defects that include aberrant chemotaxis, a failure to polarize properly in a chemoattractant
gradient and aggregation at low densities. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that the PH domain of Akt/
PKB fused to GFP transiently translocates to the
plasma membrane in response to cAMP with kinetics
similar to those of Akt/PKB kinase activation and is
localized to the leading edge of chemotaxing cells
in vivo. Our results indicate Akt/PKB is part of the
regulatory network required for sensing and
responding to the chemoattractant gradient that mediates chemotaxis and aggregation.
Keywords: Akt–PKB/chemotaxis/Dictyostelium/PI3
kinase

Introduction
The protein kinase Akt/PKB controls a variety of regulatory responses in mammalian cells, including inhibition
of apoptosis, inhibition of GSK3 activity, and regulation
of cellular metabolism and protein synthesis (Bellacosa
et al., 1991; Coffer and Woodgett, 1991; Jones et al.,
1991; Cross et al., 1995; Kohn et al., 1996; Lefebvre
et al., 1996; Deprez et al., 1997; Dudek et al., 1997;
Kauffmann-Zeh et al., 1997; Kennedy et al., 1997; Kulik
et al., 1997) and is activated by both receptor tyrosine
kinases and G protein-coupled receptors (Burgering and
Coffer, 1995; Franke et al., 1995; Andjelkovic et al.,
1997; Murga et al., 1998). In Caenorhabditis elegans,
Akt/PKB is a negative regulator of dauer larval formation
and is activated through the insulin receptor (Paradis and
Ruvkun, 1998). In mammalian cells, Akt/PKB activation
occurs through the binding of phosphatidylinositol-3,4bis-phosphate [PtdIns-(3,4)-P2] to the PH domain located
at the N-terminus of the protein, and by phosphorylation
2092

by PDK1 and proposed PDK2 of a Ser/Thr residue in the
activation loop and one near the C-terminus, respectively (Alessi et al., 1996, 1997a,b; Frech et al., 1997;
Klippel et al., 1997; Stockoe et al., 1997). PDK1, in
turn, is activated by the phosphoinositide-3 kinase
(PI3K) product phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-tris-phosphate
[PtdIns-(3,4,5)-P3] (Alessi et al., 1997a,b; Stephens
et al., 1998).
In Dictyostelium, the transition from individual cells to a
multicellular organism is controlled by the chemoattractant
extracellular cAMP. Cyclic AMP activates second messenger pathways via the serpentine, cell surface receptor
cAR1 coupled to the heterotrimeric G protein containing
the Gα2 subunit (Firtel, 1995; Chen et al., 1996; Parent
and Devreotes, 1996; Van Haastert and Kuwayama, 1997).
Two pathways are central to regulating this response:
(i) the activation of adenylyl cyclase ACA, which results
in production of cAMP, the activation of PKA and the
release of cAMP into the extracellular space, thereby
relaying the chemoattractant signal; and (ii) the activation
of guanylyl cyclase, producing cGMP, a second messenger
essential for chemotaxis. Cyclic GMP, functioning through
a proposed cGMP-dependent protein kinase, activates
myosin II kinase, which controls myosin fiber assembly
(Pagh et al., 1984; Abu-Elneel et al., 1996; Chen et al.,
1996; Dembinsky et al., 1996; Kuwayama and Van
Haastert, 1996; Van Haastert and Kuwayama, 1997).
Cyclic GMP is also required for the reorganization of the
actin cytoskeleton, via an as yet undefined mechanism.
cAMP stimulation leads to an assembly of the actin
cytoskeleton at the leading edge (Newell, 1995; Noegel
and Luna, 1995; Chen et al., 1996). Activation of guanylyl
and adenylyl cyclases is very transient, with the levels of
cGMP and cAMP peaking at ~10 and ~90 s, respectively.
Both pathways become refractory to subsequent stimulation until the cAMP is hydrolyzed by extracellular/cell
surface phosphodiesterase, allowing the pathways to
de-adapt.
The signaling pathways leading to the activation of
the adenylyl cyclase ACA during aggregation are well
understood. In addition to the Gβγ subunit, which appears
to be the direct activator of ACA, proteins such as the
cytosolic protein Pianissimo, the pleckstrin homology
(PH) domain-containing protein CRAC (which translocates from the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane at
the site of receptor activation) and the MAP kinase ERK2
play important roles in controlling the production of
cAMP, but do not affect chemotaxis (Insall et al., 1994a;
Segall et al., 1995; Wu et al., 1995; Chen et al., 1996,
1997; Firtel, 1996; Parent et al., 1998). Mutations in other
genes required for ACA activation, including the gene
encoding the putative Ras guanine nucleotide exchange
factor (GEF) Aimless (AleA) and the Ras-interacting
protein RIP3, also lead to chemotaxis defects (Insall et al.,
© European Molecular Biology Organization

Regulation of Akt/PKB

Fig. 1. Sequence, structure and expression of Dictyostelium Akt/PKB. (A) Sequence comparison of Dictyostelium Akt/PKB with human Akt/PKBα
and Akt/PKBβ, rat PKBγ and Drosophila melanogaster PKB (Bellacosa et al., 1991; Coffer and Woodgett, 1991; Jones et al., 1991; Andjelkovic
et al., 1995). Putative sites of phosphorylation in the activation loop and the C-terminal end are marked with a #; gray bar, PH domain; black bar,
kinase domain. (DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank accession Nos: Dictyostelium Akt/PKB, U15210; D.melanogaster PKB, X83510; human Akt/PKBα,
M63167; human Akt/PKBβ, M77198; rat Akt/PKBγ, D49836.) (B) Structure comparison of mammalian, Drosophila and Dictyostelium Akt/PKB.
Proteins have an N-terminal PH domain followed by a conserved kinase domain, and a C-terminal regulatory domain. The consensus sequence
around the two sites of phosphorylation are shown. (C) Western blot analysis of the developmental pattern of expression of Dictyostelium Akt/PKB.
See Materials and methods for details.

1996; S.Lee, C.Parent, R.Insall and R.A.Firtel, manuscript
in preparation). The null mutation in the gene encoding the
Ras protein RasG shows defects in cell movement, being
unable to properly regulate pseudopod extension (Tuxworth
et al., 1997). Strains lacking the MAP kinase kinase
DdMEK1 exhibit severe aggregation defects, forming
extremely small multicellular aggregates (Ma et al., 1997).
ddmek1 null cells exhibit normal receptor activation of
adenylyl cyclase, but the activation of guanylyl cyclase is
impaired and the cells are defective in chemotaxis towards
cAMP. Further analysis suggests that DdMEK1 does not lie
between the receptor and guanylyl cyclase, but permits
receptor activation of this pathway (Ma et al., 1997).
Previous studies identified a Dictyostelium homologue
of mammalian Akt/PKB (PkbA; S.K.O.Mann and
R.A.Firtel, unpublished observation; R.Dottin, DDBJ/
EMBL/GenBank accession No. DDU15210). The encoded
open reading frame (ORF) exhibits a high degree of amino
acid sequence conservation and a domain organization
that is indistinguishable from that of Akt/PKBs from
metazoans (Bellacosa et al., 1991; Coffer and Woodgett,

1991; Jones et al., 1991), including an N-terminal PH
domain, homologous kinase and C-terminal regulatory
domains, and phosphorylation sites required for Akt/
PKB activation. In this manuscript, we demonstrate that
Dictyostelium Akt/PKB is activated in response to
chemoattractant signaling. This activation is mediated
by the cAMP receptor cAR1 and requires the coupled
heterotrimeric G protein. In addition, the activation
requires the function of PI3Ks that are related to mammalian p110, PI3K. We demonstrate that pkbA null cells
exhibit aggregation-stage defects, including the inability
to polarize properly in a chemoattractant gradient and a
decrease in the rate of chemotaxis towards cAMP. Moreover, we find that an Akt/PKB PH domain–green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion (PH–GFP) transiently translocates to the plasma membrane in response to receptor
stimulation and localizes to the leading edge of chemotaxing cells. These data that suggest that transient membrane localization correlates with Akt/PKB activation by
chemoattractants, and that this pathway is involved in
controlling aspects of cell polarity and cell movement.
2093

R.Meili et al.

Fig. 2. Activation of Akt/PKB. (A) Akt/PKB activity of immunoprecipitates towards H2B as a substrate is shown. Aggregation-stage cells (see
Materials and methods) are activated by cAMP. Aliquots were taken at the timepoints indicated. Cells were lysed, Akt/PKB was immunoprecipitated
using a rabbit anti-Dictyostelium PKB peptide antibody, and kinase activity was measured as described in Materials and methods. Wild-type and
pkbA null cells are shown. Activity peaks between 10 and 20 s. (B) PKB activity in wild-type cells, pkbA null cells, PI3K1/PI3K2 double knockouts
(pi3k1/2 null cells), PKB overexpressing cells and pik1/2 double knockout cells constitutively expressing PI3K1. Wild-type cells were also treated
with the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 (Calbiochem) at 12.5 μM for 60 s immediately prior to cAMP stimulation. Wild-type controls were done at the
same time each mutant was analyzed as an internal control. (C) Akt/PKB activity is depicted in cAR1/cAR3 (car1–/3–) double knockout cells.
cAR1/cAR3 double knockout cells constitutively expressing cAR1 under the control of the Act15 promoter, gβ null cells and gα2 null cells
constitutively expressing cAR1, and wild-type cells (Insall et al., 1994b). (D) Left-hand panel shows H2B kinase activity of cells overexpressing
wild-type Akt/PKB and Akt/PKB tagged with the N-terminus of c-Src which is sufficient for N-terminal myristylation and membrane localization.
Right-hand panel depicts the Western blots of aliquots from the same experiment using the anti-PKB antibody. Wild-type Akt/PKB and the
myristylated Akt/PKB are expressed at the same level. A closed arrowhead marks the position of the phosphorylated H2B. All experiments shown
have been repeated independently. The data shown in all panels are representative. car1–/3– double knockout cells expressing cAR1, and gβ and gα
null cells constitutively expressing cAR1 and their use in similar experiments have been described previously (Insall et al., 1994b; Milne et al.,
1995; Schnitzler et al., 1995; Wu et al., 1995; Maeda et al., 1996).

The conservation of regulatory pathways that control cell
movement and cytoskeletal elements between Dictyostelium and mammalian cells (Chen et al., 1996; Zigmond
et al., 1997) potentially allows one to use findings in one
system to understand cell movement in another.

Results
Structure and expression pattern of Dictyostelium
Akt/PKB
Akt/PKB (pkbA) was cloned using data from previous
PCR screens (S.K.O.Mann and R.A.Firtel, unpublished
observation) and sequence data in DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank
(accession No. DDU15210). Figure 1A shows the derived
amino acid sequence of Dictyostelium Akt/PKB compared
with that of metazoan Akt/PKBs (Bellacosa et al., 1991;
Coffer and Woodgett, 1991; Jones et al., 1991). There is

2094

strong amino acid sequence conservation in the N-terminal
PH and kinase domains. The site of expected phosphorylation in the activation loop of the kinase is conserved.
Comparison of the site that is phosphorylated near the
C-terminus in mammalian Akt/PKBs identifies a possible
phosphorylation consensus sequence (Figure 1B). In mammalian Akt/PKBs, this second phosphorylation site is a
Ser, while the Dictyostelium Akt/PKB has a Thr at the
comparable position.
Figure 1C depicts Western blot analysis of Akt/PKB
protein levels (see Materials and methods). The protein is
found in vegetative cells and levels increase during the
first few hours of development. After 8 h, the time of
mound formation, the levels have decreased significantly
and the protein is barely detectably using our assay. The
protein is not detected in the Akt/PKB null strain (data
not shown).

Regulation of Akt/PKB

Fig. 3. Membrane localization of Dictyostelium Akt/PKB PH–GFP fusion protein. (A) Wild-type cells expressing the Akt/PKB PH domain fused to GFP
expressed under the control of the Act15 promoter were pulsed for 4.5 h to make them aggregation-competent and then plated on a glass coverslip glued
over a hole in a 30 mm Petri dish (see Materials and methods). By applying pressure to a glass capillary filled with 150 μM cAMP, a short pulse of cAMP
was released at t0 and the ensuing changes in GFP:PH distribution were recorded. The first image is taken immediately before the cAMP addition. One
whole cell and part of another are in the field. Images were taken every 2.8 s. Every image is shown for the first 11.2 s and then every other image.
(B) Aggregation-competent cells were plated on a coverslip and allowed to chemotax towards a micropipet containing 150 μM cAMP (approximate
position of the tip indicated by the asterisk in the first image). Accumulation of PH–GFP can be seen at the leading edge of some cells. Three of these cells
are marked with an arrowhead. The time for each image relative to when the recording was initiated. An enlargement of part of the second image (8 s)
showing localization at the leading edge is shown. The CCD integration time for each image was ~8 s. See Materials and methods for details. All
experiments have been repeated and the data shown are representative. Scale bar, 10 μm; the same scale is shown for all parts of the figure.

2095

R.Meili et al.

Activation of Akt/PKB by the chemoattractant
cAMP
Cyclic AMP is the chemoattractant that regulates aggregation in Dictyostelium (see Introduction). To determine
whether Dictyostelium Akt/PKB activity is stimulated in
response to the chemoattractant, aggregation-stage cells
were stimulated by cAMP, lysed, and Akt/PKB was
immunoprecipitated with a rabbit anti-Dictyostelium Akt/
PKB peptide antibody (see Materials and methods).
Figure 2A shows that kinase activity towards histone 2B
(H2B) is rapidly stimulated in response to cAMP, peaking
at 10–20 s, after which the activity rapidly decreases. The
kinetics of activation and subsequent adaptation are very
similar to those of cAMP stimulation of guanylyl cyclase
activity (Van Haastert and Van der Heijden, 1983). To
determine whether the stimulated kinase activity is due to
Akt/PKB, we created an Akt/PKB null (pkbA null) strain by
homologous recombination (see Materials and methods).
Immunoprecipitates from these cells only contain a low
background activity that does not change in response to
cAMP stimulation. Mammalian Akt/PKB kinase activity
is activated through the phosphorylation of conserved Ser/
Thr residues (see Introduction). To examine this indirectly,
we mutated the conserved residues (Figure 1B) to Ala
(pkbAT278A,T435A) and overexpressed the mutant protein in
pkbA null cells. As can be seen, cells overexpressing
pkbAT278A,T435A show no receptor-mediated activation of
Akt/PKB activity (Figure 2A). These data are consistent
with the possibility that the Dictyostelium Akt/PKB is

2096

activated by phosphorylation in a similar way to mammalian Akt/PKB.
Cyclic AMP activation of Akt/PKB requires the
PI3Ks, PI3K1 and PI3K2
In mammals, Akt/PKB is co-regulated by the phospholipid
products of PI3K PtdIns-(3,4,5)-P3 and PtIns-(3,4)-P2.
We previously identified three Dictyostelium PI3Ks
(PI3K1–3) with extensive homology to members of the
mammalian p110 family of PI3Ks (Zhou et al., 1995).
PI3K1 and PI3K2 are most closely related to each other
and appear to be genetically redundant. A single knockout
of either gene has no overt phenotype, while the double
knockout has multiple growth and developmental defects,
including defects in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton (Zhou et al., 1995, 1998; Buczynski et al., 1997).
PI3K3 is most homologous to mammalian p110γ
(Vanhaesbroeck et al., 1997). A knockout of this gene has
no visible consequences but is essential for growth in a
genetic background lacking either PI3K1 or PI3K2.
Figure 2B demonstrates that Dictyostelium Akt/PKB is
not activated in response to cAMP in PI3K1/2 double
knockout cells (pi3k1–/2–). Activation is normal in PI3K1
or PI3K2 single knockouts or PI3K3 null cells (data not
shown). Expression of PI3K1 in pi3k1–/2– cells results in
complementation of the growth and developmental defects
of pi3k1–/2– cells (Zhou et al., 1995; T.B.K.Reddy, R.Meili
and R.A.Firtel, unpublished observation). When assayed
for cAMP-stimulated Akt/PKB activation, these cells

Regulation of Akt/PKB

exhibit receptor stimulation of Akt/PKB activity
(Figure 2B). LY294002 is an inhibitor of mammalian
PI3Ks (Vlahos et al., 1994). Although use of the pi3k1/2
double knockout strain provides a strong genetic test for
the requirement of PI3K for Akt/PKB activation, we
cannot rule out that this effect is due to a pleiotropic
effect of disrupting PI3K1 and PI3K2. We therefore tested
whether LY294002 can inhibit cAMP-stimulated Akt/PKB
activation. As depicted in Figure 2B, addition of LY294002
1 min before cAMP decreased the level of Akt/PKB
activation by ⬎90%. Together, these data indicate that

PI3K1 and PI3K2 are required for Akt/PKB activation in
Dictyostelium.
Many, but not all cAMP-stimulated, receptor-dependent
pathways in Dictyostelium require heterotrimeric G
proteins containing the Gα2 protein subunit (Firtel, 1995;
Chen et al., 1996; Parent and Devreotes, 1996). To
investigate whether this is the case for Akt/PKB, we
analyzed cAMP stimulation of Akt/PKB in gα2 null and
gβ null cells that constitutively express cAR1 (to ensure
that the receptor is not limiting). To minimize experimental
differences between these cells and wild-type control cells,

Fig. 4. Time-lapse phase-contrast video microscopy of wild-type and PKB cells during aggregation. (A) Aggregation of wild-type cells is depicted.
Log-phase vegetative cells were washed and plated at ~95% confluency on agar as described previously (Ma et al., 1997). White arrowheads point
to several aggregation centers. Arrowheads with black centers point to the perimeters of the aggregation domains. Aggregation centers can be seen
by 3 h and the perimeters of the aggregation domains are observed by the 3 h 30 min timepoint. Loose aggregates are formed by 6 h.
(B) Corresponding experiments were performed using pkbA null cells. Aggregation centers are not observed until 3 h 30 min or later. These centers
tend to be transient. Aggregation domains are visible by 4 h 30 min. The domains are larger than those in wild-type cells. Because of the location of
the aggregation domains, the region of the plate being viewed was shifted at the 5 h timepoint to show a representative large aggregation center.
This is representative of observations over the entire plate. Images from 5 h 10 min onward depict this extremely large aggregation center and a
smaller one. Very long aggregation streams are observed for the large aggregate; the large aggregate breaks up into smaller aggregates which
produce tips and undergo morphogenesis. Experimental details are described in Materials and methods. All experiments have been repeated and the
data shown are representative. Scale bar, 100 μm; valid for all frames in the figure.

2097

R.Meili et al.

these cells were stimulated for 5 h with 30 nM cAMP
(see Materials and methods). This stimulation activates
receptor-dependent, G protein-independent pathways such
as the activation of ERK2, calcium influx and receptor
phosphorylation (Milne and Devreotes, 1993; Milne et al.,
1995; Maeda et al., 1996; Kim et al., 1997). Neither gβ
nor gα2 null cells constitutively expressing cAR1 show
receptor stimulation of Akt/PKB activity (Figure 2C).
car1/car3 double knockout strains, which lack cAR1 and
the other aggregation-stage receptor cAR3 (Insall et al.,
1994b), do not exhibit cAMP stimulation of Akt/PKB
activity (Figure 2C). These data indicate that cAMP
stimulation of Akt/PKB activity functions through the
cAMP serpentine receptor and heterotrimeric G proteins
containing the Gα2 subunit. Our data suggest the induction
of Akt/PKB activity requires the function of PI3K1 and
PI3K2, and is activated through the cAMP receptors via
a G protein-linked pathway.

together with the integration times of ~8 s per frame, reduce
the probability of synchronizing each image captured to
visualize leading edge localization. We therefore do not
expect our recordings to show the translocation for every
cell as it moves. Moreover, as the cell lifts its leading
edge during the initial forward movement, the leading
edge is no longer in focus. Changing the plane of focus
periodically shows cells with the PH–GFP fusion at
the leading edge (R.Meili and R.A.Firtel, unpublished
observation). In at least three of the cells (Figure 3B,
marked by arrowheads), the timing of the recording and
the response was fortuitously synchronized. The Akt/PKB
PH–GFP fusion localizes to the leading edge, delocalizes
and relocalizes as the cells move. When the cells form cell–
cell contacts as they do in vivo during stream formation, a
more intense fluorescence can be seen where the cells
touch. This is also observed in experiments using CRAC–
GFP (C.Parent and P.Devreotes, personal communication).

Cyclic AMP-stimulated translocation of an Akt/PKB
PH–GFP gene fusion
Akt/PKB translocates to the plasma membrane in response
to receptor activation (Andjelkovic et al., 1997). In addition, the PH domain of mammalian Akt/PKB binds PtdIns(3,4,5)-P3 and PtdIns-(3,4)-P2, leading to the activation of
kinase activity (Burgering and Coffer, 1995; Frech et al.,
1997; Klippel et al., 1997). As Dictyostelium Akt/PKB
activation requires the function of PI3K1 or PI3K2, we
examined whether the Dictyostelium Akt/PKB PH domain
fused to GFP translocates to the plasma membrane with
kinetics consistent with the activation of Akt/PKB kinase
activity. As depicted in Figure 3A, the Akt/PKB PH–GFP
fusion is uniformly distributed in the cytoplasm of resting,
unstimulated cells. In response to cAMP stimulation,
the fusion protein rapidly translocates to the plasma
membrane. Partial membrane localization can be detected
in the first image (2.8 s after stimulation) and is maximal
at ~6–9 s. This translocation is very transient, being
significantly reduced by 11 s, and not discernible by 22 s.
These kinetics of PH–GFP translocation to the plasma are
very similar to those of receptor-mediated activation of
Akt/PKB kinase activity. Akt/PKB activity remains high
for a short period of time after the PH–GFP fusion is
no longer membrane-localized, suggesting that continued
membrane localization may not be required for kinase
activity.
We examined localization of Akt/PKB PH–GFP fusion
in cells chemotaxing to cAMP (Figure 3B). Of the
migrating cells (some cells are non-responsive and do not
migrate at all; we expect this is due to photo damage),
~70% show a transient localization of the Akt/PKB PH–
GFP fusion to the leading edge. A careful frame-by-frame
viewing of the images reveals that this translocation
coincides with the movement of these cells, as has been
described for the PH domain-containing protein CRAC
(Parent et al., 1998). Cell movement occurs by the
protrusion of a leading edge followed by a lifting and
retraction of the posterior of the cell (see Soll and
Voss, 1998). The rapidity of the PH–GFP membrane
translocation suggests that the Akt/PKB localization occurs
during the initial phase of this two-step process, prior to
the protrusion of a new pseudopod. The rapid and transient
kinetics of this translocation, as depicted in Figure 3A,

pkbA null cells exhibit aggregation defects
When Dictyostelium cells are plated for development on
phosphate-buffered agar plates as an ~95% confluent
monolayer, wild-type cells aggregate to form a multicellular aggregate in ~8 h (Ma et al., 1997). The properties of
this aggregation can be visualized by time-lapse phasecontrast video microscopy, which permits the observation
of wave patterns of cAMP moving through the field of
cells that result in cell shape changes and chemotaxis (Ma
et al., 1997). Aggregation centers become very well
defined by 4 h, followed shortly thereafter by the chemotaxis of cells towards the aggregation center (Figure 4A).
Examination of the videotapes of pkbA null cells reveals
similar refractoral waves moving across the field of cells
prior to the formation of aggregation centers (data not
shown), indicating that pkbA null cells produce and
respond to cAMP. As shown in Figure 4B, pkbA null cells
exhibit refractoral patterns in the monolayer of cells as
aggregation centers form in response to cAMP signaling.
However, contrary to our observations for wild-type cells,
the centers are not stable. Eventually, a few large aggregation centers emerge. Chemotaxis commences and very
large aggregates form (Figure 4B). When we examine
aggregation under conditions in which cells are plated at
~25% confluency, wild-type cells aggregate normally with
only a slight delay and all of the cells participate in
aggregate formation (data not shown). In contrast, pkbA
null cells do not aggregate (data not shown).
Many of the components of the aggregation-stage signaling pathways are induced by nanomolar pulses of cAMP
via an autoregulatory loop. Aggregation-stage cells are
generated by pulsing cells in suspension with 30 nM
cAMP for 5 h to maximally express receptors and other
components of the pathways required for receptor activation of adenylyl and guanylyl cyclases (Devreotes et al.,
1987; Mann and Firtel, 1987; Saxe et al., 1991). To
determine whether pkbA null cells are unable to aggregate
properly due to an inability to activate cAMP-induced
aggregation-stage gene expression, pkbA null cells were
pulsed with 30 nM cAMP. We examined expression of
two aggregation-stage genes, those encoding cAR1 and
the cell adhesion molecule csA, which are good indicators
of the expression of this class of gene. Both genes are
expressed similarly in pkbA null and wild-type cells

2098

Regulation of Akt/PKB

Fig. 5. Aggregation-stage gene expression and cAMP-induced
activation of guanylyl cyclase in wild-type and pkbA null cells.
(A) Expression of the pulse-induced aggregation-stage genes csA and
cAR1. Cells were pulsed with either 25 (lanes A) or 80 nM (lanes B)
cAMP every 6 s. RNA was isolated and analyzed by RNA blot
hybridization. (B) Cyclic AMP stimulation of guanylyl cyclase was
measured by quantitating cGMP production in response to cAMP
stimulation. The experiment was repeated several times representative
results are shown. See Materials and methods for details.

(Figure 5A). This finding strongly suggests that the components required for aggregation, except for Akt/PKB, are
not limiting in pkbA null cells and that these cells respond
to cAMP and activated aggregation-stage pathways. We
cannot exclude that some genes required for chemosensory
signaling are not fully expressed in pkbA null cells.
The kinetics of activation of Dictyostelium Akt/PKB in
response to the chemoattractant cAMP are very similar to
those of accumulation of cGMP (Van Haastert and Van der
Heijden, 1983), a second messenger required for chemotaxis, and pkbA null cells show aggregation defects,
suggesting that Akt/PKB function may be required for
proper chemotaxis. To examine this question, we directly
compared receptor-mediated cGMP production and the
ability to chemotax in pkbA null and wild-type cells. As
we show in Figure 5B, addition of cAMP to aggregationstage cells results in a rapid stimulation of cGMP production with kinetics and levels of accumulation similar to
those of control wild-type cells. Therefore, aggregation
phenotypes exhibited by pkbA null cells are presumably
not due to effects on guanylyl cyclase activation and
cGMP production.
pkbA null cells exhibit defects in polarization and
cell movement in chemoattractant gradients
To examine chemotaxis, we assayed the ability of aggregation-competent pkbA null cells (cells pulsed for 4.5 h with
cAMP) to chemotax to cAMP emitted from a micropipet.
Figure 6A (left panel) depicts wild-type cells chemotaxing
towards a micropipet containing cAMP, a response that is

conveniently analyzed by time-lapse video microscopy.
Wild-type cells become very elongated (polarized) in the
cAMP gradient and move with pseudopodia extending
almost exclusively in the direction of the cAMP gradient
(Figure 6B). In contrast, pkbA null cells are less polarized
in the gradient and the majority of cells remain more
rounded (Figure 6A, right panel, and C). Detailed analysis
indicates that the pkbA null cells often extend pseudopodia
in directions perpendicular to the direction of the cAMP
gradient (Figure 6C), a response that is seldom seen with
wild-type cells but is similar to observations in rasG null
cells (Tuxworth et al., 1997). pkbA null cells move more
slowly than wild-type cells, as illustrated in Figure 6A,
where many fewer pkbA null cells accumulate by the
micropipet tip at 20 min than wild-type cells (Figure 6A).
To exclude the possibility that pkbA null cells are simply
delayed in obtaining the ability to properly chemotax, we
assayed pkbA cells that had been pulsed for as much as
7 h with 30 nM cAMP prior to assaying chemotaxis. We
observed no difference in the response of pkbA null cells
(data not shown).
Our results indicate that Akt/PKB function is required
for the proper function of cells in a chemoattractant
gradient and may play a role in suppressing lateral
pseudopod extension. We examine this further by overexpressing either wild-type Akt/PKB or Akt/PKB carrying
the N-terminal myristylation signal from mammalian Src,
which localizes proteins to the plasma membrane (Buser
et al., 1994; Sigal et al., 1994). As shown in Figure 2B,
overexpression of wild-type Akt/PKB results in an increase
in basal and cAMP-stimulated kinase activity in Akt/PKB
immunoprecipitates. When the myristylated wild-type
Akt/PKB is overexpressed to the same level as wildtype Akt/PKB as determined by Western blot analysis
(Figure 2F), there is a significant increase in basal activity
(Figure 2E). We envision this to be due to the constitutive
localization of Akt/PKB to the plasma membrane leading
to a constitutive activation of kinase activity, as has been
demonstrated for mammalian Akt/PKB (Kohn et al.,
1996). When we analyzed chemotaxis towards cAMP
emitted from a micropipet, cells expressing the myristylated Akt/PKB polarized but moved extremely slowly, even
compared with pkbA null cells (data not shown).

Discussion
Akt/PKB is transiently activated in response to the
chemoattractant cAMP
We demonstrate that in response to the chemoattractant
cAMP, Dictyostelium cells rapidly stimulate Akt/PKB
activity. The activity peaks at 10–15 s and then quickly
decreases, indicating that Akt/PKB activation, like many
other aggregation-stage responses in Dictyostelium, rapidly
adapts. We find that Akt/PKB activation requires cellsurface cAMP receptors and the heterotrimeric G protein
that couples to other receptor-mediated aggregation-stage
responses. Interestingly, activation of Akt/PKB in Dictyostelium requires the function of two closely-related PI3Ks
that exhibit a high level of homology to the mammalian
p110 family of PI3Ks, which are activated in response to
a variety of extracellular signals (Vanhaesbroeck et al.,
1997). The role of PI3K in Akt/PKB activation is supported
by our results demonstrating that the PI3K inhibitor

2099

R.Meili et al.

LY294002, at concentrations similar to those that inhibit
PI3K activity in mammalian cells, effectively blocks
cAMP stimulation when it is given only 1 min prior to
receptor stimulation. The genetic and inhibitor studies
strongly suggest that the requirement of PI3K for Akt/
PKB activation is direct. We suggest that receptor stimulation leads to the activation of PI3K via a G proteincoupled pathway, and the activation of Akt/PKB, possibly
via a mechanism that is similar to Akt/PKB activation in
mammalian cells. This occurs via a phosphorylation of
conserved residues in the activation loop and C-terminal
tail (see Introduction). Consistent with such a model, we
show that Dictyostelium Akt/PKB, in which these two
residues are mutated to Ala (pkbAT278A,T435A), is not
activated in response to cAMP.
We found that a GFP fusion with the Akt/PKB PH
domain transiently translocates to the plasma membrane

2100

responding cells. We show that as cells form cell–cell
contacts, as they would in the formation of aggregation
stream in vivo, there is a sustained localization of PH–
GFP at the position of the cell contact. We surmise that
cell–cell contact may potentiate pathways leading to this
localization. Although we do not directly demonstrate that
the whole kinase undergoes a similar translocation in
response to cAMP due to technical difficulties with the
full-length Akt/PKB–GFP fusion, our data are consistent
with a membrane translocation of Dictyostelium Akt/PKB
in response to receptor stimulation and, in accordance
with models describing the activation of mammalian Akt/
PKB (see Introduction). Considering the requirement of
PI3K1/2 for Akt/PKB activation, we hypothesize that
PI3K1 and PI3K2 are transiently activated in response
to cAMP and their activation is required for Akt/PKB
activation. Recently, Parent et al. (1998) demonstrated

Regulation of Akt/PKB

Fig. 6. Chemotaxis of wild-type and pkbA null cells. Wild-type and pkbA null cells were washed and pulsed for 4.5 h with 30 nM cAMP every
10 min (see Materials and methods), and plated on a Petri dish with a hole in the center over which a glass coverslip has been glued in place for the
chemotaxis assay. The tip of a micropipet containing 150 μM cAMP is visible. (A) Chemotaxis of wild-type cells and pkbA null cells. The three lefthand panels of the figure show wild-type cells. Accumulation of cells at the micropipet tip is seen within 10 min and significant accumulation is
observed after 20 min. The right-hand side of the figure shows the chemotaxis of pkbA null cells. pkbA null cells move very slowly and very few
cells have accumulated at the tip after 20 min, even though the initial density of the pkbA null cells is slightly higher than for the wild-type cells
(compare the ‘0 min’ panels). (B) Chemotaxis of a single wild-type cell towards a micropipet containing cAMP recorded at 6 s intervals. The frames
show the same area of the Petri dish (data courtesy of Chang Chung; Chung et al., submitted). Note: after the 108 s time point, the needle was
moved further away from the cells. For both wild-type cells and pkbA null cells (C), the properties of the cell movement was not dependent on how
close the needle was to a specific cell as long as the cell was in the field of view shown in (A). (C) Movement of a pkbA null cell. A single cell is
viewed at 12 s intervals. The position of the micropipet remains constant and points in the direction of the open arrowhead shown in the upper left
panel. The cell being followed is marked by a white arrowhead. The cells do not polarize in the direction of movement. Pseudopodia are extended in
multiple directions simultaneously and not in the direction of the chemoattractant gradient. All experiments have been repeated and the data shown
are representative. Scale bars, 10 μm in (A) and (B), 20 μm in (C).

2101

R.Meili et al.

that a GFP fusion of the PH domain containing protein
CRAC, which is required for receptor activation of adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium, shows a transient membrane
translocation to the leading edge of cells with kinetics
similar to those of the Akt/PKB PH–GFP fusion in
response to cAMP stimulation. In polarized, chemotaxing
cells, the Akt/PKB PH–GFP fusion exhibits a similar
localization to the leading edge. As described in the
Results section, our data suggest that in chemotaxing cells
the Akt/PKB PH–GFP fusion transiently localizes to the
leading edge, indicating this is a dynamic process that
occurs during the process of chemotaxis. It is possible
that the same second messenger regulates the membrane
localization of both proteins, nucleating the formation of
signaling complexes at the leading edge required for a
series of signaling responses, including activation of
adenylyl cyclase and pathways leading to cell movement.
This would facilitate the interaction of the proteins
involved in these pathways and localize the downstream
responses to permit the directed cell movement required
during aggregation. Such signaling complexes have been
reported in Dictyostelium (Xiao and Devreotes, 1997),
although it is not known how many components of
these pathways are localized. It is expected that similar
complexes would be formed in metazoans.
pkbA null cells exhibit aggregation defects
Our phenotypic analysis of pkbA null cells suggests that
Akt/PKB has multiple functions during the aggregation
stage of Dictyostelium development that include the regulation of chemotaxis. pkbA null cells are less polarized in
cAMP gradients and the rate of movement of these cells
is slower than for wild-type cells. Closer examination
reveals that, unlike wild-type cells, many of the pkbA null
cells produce lateral pseudopodia even though cAMP
receptors are uniformly distributed along the surface of
the cell and thus all parts of a cell in a cAMP gradient
receive a signal (Xiao et al., 1997). rasG null cells have
similar cell movement defects (Tuxworth et al., 1997).
Cells must discriminate between small concentration differences between the front and back of a cell in a gradient
to regulate directional responses such as chemotaxis.
Previous results with CRAC–GFP similarly indicated that
the activation of downstream pathways may be restricted
to the leading edge of a migrating cell (Parent et al.,
1998). It is therefore probable that an intracellular signal
relay mechanism prevents pseudopodia formation in
regions of the cells other than the front. Alternatively,
some components of these pathways may be limiting and
their accumulation in one part of the cells may limit the
ability for the same pathway to be activated in another
part of the same cell. While we cannot distinguish between
these possibilities, we favor the former model, which is
consistent with localization of CRAC–GFP and Akt/PKB
PH–GFP at the leading edge. Our data are consistent with
Akt/PKB being required for the suppression of lateral
pseudopod formation perpendicular to the chemoattractant
gradient. We demonstrate that overexpression of a membrane-targeted (myr) Akt/PKB results in a very high
constitutive Akt/PKB kinase activity, and myr-Akt/PKBexpressing cells are unable to chemotax efficiently. Overexpression of a membrane-targeted Akt/PKB might result
in a constitutive activation of Akt/PKB along the entire

2102

plasma membrane. We expect that such a non-spatially
restricted active Akt/PKB may inhibit chemotaxis by
preventing the cells from detecting the directionality of a
subsequent cAMP signal. Although these cells become
polarized, possibly due to a spatially-restricted activation
of other cellular responses, the cells move more slowly
than wild-type cells, suggesting that localized activation
of Akt/PKB may be an important component of cell
movement. In mammalian cells, PI3K is required for Rasmediated reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton in nonmotile cells (Ma et al., 1998). It is not known whether
this function of PI3K requires downstream activation of
Akt/PKB.
We found that pkbA null cells exhibit normal expression
of two aggregation-stage genes that are representative of
genes expressed during aggregation required for chemotaxis. Thus, we do not think the defects in cell movement
that we have observed result from secondary effects on gene
expression, although we cannot exclude the possibility that
some genes required for chemosensory responses are not
fully expressed. We demonstrated that cells pulsed for as
long as 7 h have similar chemotaxis defects. Thus, if pkbA
null cells are delayed in attaining chemotaxis competence,
it cannot be overcome by pulsing the cells for a longer
period of time. Moreover, cAMP activation of guanylyl
cyclase in pkbA null cells, which is required for chemotaxis,
is indistinguishable from that of wild-type cells, indicating
that defects in this pathway are not responsible for cell
movement defects of pkbA null cells and that the ability to
activate this pathway is not delayed in pkbA null cells.
pkbA null cells have two other aggregation defects.
First, pkbA null cells produce few stable aggregation
centers and the formation of aggregates is delayed compared with wild-type cells. Aggregation requires each cell
to respond to ~20 pulses of cAMP (one every 6–10 min)
to produce a multicellular organism (Firtel, 1995; Ginsburg
et al., 1995; Van Haastert, 1995; Parent and Devreotes,
1996). Analysis of video movies of pkbA null cells
indicates that aggregation centers appear but are rapidly
lost, with new centers appearing and disappearing. Eventually, a few dominant, large aggregation centers persist
over an area in which wild-type cells normally have
multiple stable aggregation domains. One possible
explanation of this phenotype is that Akt/PKB affects
the adaptation of the signaling pathways, although the
available data do not prove this model. The second
phenotype is an inability of cells to aggregate when plated
at lower densities. We think this phenotype is associated
with the reduced efficiency of chemotaxis. When cells are
plated as a confluent monolayer, cell–cell contacts may
facilitate chemotaxis, possibly through cell adhesion molecules that are induced during aggregation. It is thought
that such processes allow the coalescing of mek1 null
cells to form aggregates (Ma et al., 1997).
We predict that Akt/PKB translocates to the plasma
membrane in response to cAMP signaling, as this would
be consistent with a proposed pathway for Akt/PKB
activation and the present data. As many of the components
required for chemotaxis are thought to be conserved
between Dictyostelium and mammalian cells (Chen et al.,
1996; Zigmond et al., 1997), it is possible that PI3K and
Akt/PKB may play similar roles in the response of
mammalian cells to chemokines.

Regulation of Akt/PKB

Materials and methods
Materials
Sodium orthovanadate, β-glycerophosphate, aprotinin and leupeptin were
obtained from Sigma. H2B was purchased from Boehringer Mannheim.
[γ-32P]ATP was from ICN. Protein A–Sepharose CL-4B was obtained
from Pharmacia Biotech., Inc.
Antibodies
A rabbit polyclonal anti-Dictyostelium PKB antibody was raised against
a glutaraldehyde conjugate of bovine serum albumin (BSA) with the
peptide KGGVAESEHLER corresponding to the C-terminus of DdPKB.
Preparation of the affinity resin and affinity purification was essentially
performed according to Harlow and Lane (1988). The peptide was
coupled to immobilized diaminodipropylamine (Pierce) activated with
glutaraldehyde (Sigma, Grade I) by rotating a slurry containing 5 mg
peptide/ml beads for 2 h at room temperature.
Creation of pkbA null strain
A pkbA knockout construct was made by inserting the Blasticidin
resistance (Sutoh, 1993) cassette into a BamHI site created at base 520
of the PKB cDNA. Specifically, pkbA knockout plasmid was made by
inserting a Blasticidin resistance (Sutoh, 1993) cassette into a BamHI
site inserted by PCR at a position 520 of the Akt/PKB ORF in the
cDNA in the following construct: a 5⬘-fragment including a small
intron was amplified from genomic DNA by PCR using the primers
TAAATATGTCAACAGCACCAATTAAAC and TTTTTGGATCCTTTGAAGAATATTACGCTCAC and subsequently digested with the
enzymes HincII and BamHI. A 3⬘ fragment was amplified using
the primers TTTTGGATCCATCACCCATTTTTGGTTAATCTC and
TTTTTTCTAGAGGGAACGAGCATCTGGAG and digested with the
enzymes BamHI and AatII. These fragments were used to replace the
HincII and AatII fragment in the pkbA cDNA clone.
The vector was digested with HincII and AatII and the DNA was
transformed into Dictyostelium cells. After Bsr selection (Sutoh, 1993),
cells were plated for the isolation of clones. Randomly selected clones
were screened for a gene disruption by PCR, which was then confirmed
by Southern blot analysis. Two independent clones were picked and
examined. Both showed the same aggregation defects described in the
Results section.
Plasmids
A full-length pkbA cDNA clone was obtained by screening a 12–16 h
developmental λZAP library (Schnitzler et al., 1994) with a probe
amplified from genomic DNA by PCR.
To introduce a membrane targeting epitope, a linker coding for the
first 16 amino acids of chicken c-Src composed of the myristylation
signal and the basic amino acid cluster sufficient for stable membrane
association (Buser et al., 1994; Sigal et al., 1994) was added to the
N-terminus using the unique HincII site.
For the PH–GFP fusion construct, GFP was amplified by PCR using
a template obtained from Roger Tsien (UCSD) using the two primers
GTTTTTACTAGTAAAAAATGAGTAAAGGTGAAGAACTTTTC and
TTTTTGATATCTTGTATAGTTCATCCATGC. This product was
digested with SpeI and EcoRV. DNA encoding the first 113 amino
acids of Akt/PKB comprising the PH domain was amplified from the
pkbA cDNA using primers TAAATATGTCAACAGCACCAATTAAAC
and CCCCCCCTCGAGAAAAATTAAGATTCCGATTTCTTTGGTTGTTTACC. This product was digested with HincII and XhoI. In a
triple ligation, the two PCR products were subcloned into pBluescript,
sequenced, and inserted into the expression vector DIP-j expression
(Gaskins et al., 1996).
The putative non-activatable mutant, pkbAT278A,T435A, in which the
putative phosphorylation sites of Akt/PKB were mutated to Ala, was
generated using the ‘Transformer site-directed mutagenesis kit’
(Clonetech) with the oligonucleotides GTACCACAGAAAGCACCAGTTTTG and GATTCAGCGACATAAGCAAATCCTTCAAAATC. Successful mutagenesis was confirmed by sequencing.
All pkbA constructs were subcloned into DIP-j for expression in
Dictyostelium (Gaskins et al., 1996).
cAMP stimulation of Dictyostelium cells
To produce aggregation-competent cells, log-phase vegetative cells were
washed three times with Na/K phosphate buffer and resuspended at a
density of 2–3⫻106 cells/ml in Na/K phosphate buffer and pulsed for
5 h with 30 nM cAMP every 10 min (Devreotes et al., 1987; Mann and

Firtel, 1987; Saxe et al., 1991). The cells were collected by centrifugation
and resuspended at a density of 2–3⫻107 cells/ml. Cells were allowed
to resensitize to being able to be stimulated by cAMP by bubbling air
through the cell suspension for 10 min (Devreotes et al., 1987; Ma
et al., 1997). A sample of 200 μl was taken before the cells were
stimulated with cAMP (100 nM final concentration). Samples were taken
at the times indicated.

Lysis and immunoprecipitation
The 200 μl samples were lysed by mixing with an equal volume of 2⫻
lysis buffer [50 mM Tris pH 7.6 at room temperature, 200 mM NaCl,
20 mM NaF, 2 mM vanadate, 50 mM β-glycerophosphate, 6 mM sodium
pyrophosphate, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mM EGTA, 4 μg/ml leupeptin, 4 μg/ml
aprotinin, 2% Nonidet P-40 (NP-40), 20% glycerol, 2 mM dithiothreitol
(DTT)]. The lysate was pre-cleared by centrifugation after addition of
20 μl pansorbin (Calbiochem). One microliter of antibody was added to
200 μl supernatant and incubated on ice for 1 h. The formed immune
complexes were collected with 50 μl of a 1:1 slurry of protein A beads
in lysis buffer by incubation under agitation for 1 h at 4°C. The beads
were washed twice with lysis buffer and twice with kinase buffer (25 mM
MOPS pH 7.4 at room temperature, 25 mM β-glycerophosphate, 20 mM
magnesium chloride, 1 mM DTT).
PKB/Akt activity assay
PKB/Akt activity was measured in a immunocomplex kinase assay
following immunoprecipitation with the anti-PKB antibody. The beads
were incubated with 75 μl kinase buffer containing 5 μCi [γ-32P]ATP,
5 μM cold ATP, and 5 μg H2B as substrate. The reaction was stopped
by the addition of 25 μl 4⫻ sample buffer and boiling for 5 min. The
samples were separated by SDS–PAGE (12.5%), blotted onto a PVDF
membrane (Millipore), and exposed to film. All assays were repeated
independently.
cGMP assay
To measure cGMP production in response to cAMP stimulation, cells
were prepared and stimulated as described in the section entitled ‘cAMP
stimulation of Dictyostelium cells’ and assayed as described previously
(Van Haastert and Van der Heijden, 1983; Ma et al., 1997). One-hundred
microliter samples were taken at appropriate intervals and processed
using the ‘Cyclic GMP [3H] assay system’ (Amersham) following the
manufacturer’s instructions. The assay was independently repeated. A
representative experiment is shown.
Developmental time course of Akt/PKB levels: Western blot
analysis
Exponentially growing cells were harvested and washed twice with
12 mM Na/K phosphate buffer pH 6.1 and plated on Na/K phosphate
agar plates at a density of 4⫻106 cells/cm2. For each time point, 1.5⫻107
cells were harvested. The samples for Western blotting were processed
as described under ‘Lysis and immunoprecipitation’. PKB was released
from the protein A beads by boiling in 100 μl 1⫻ SDS sample buffer.
Materials were sized by SDS–PAGE.
After separating the samples (10 μl/lane) by SDS–PAGE and blotting
onto PVDF membranes (Millipore), the membranes were probed using
standard Western blotting protocols. For detection of the primary antiAkt/PKB antibody, we used an alkaline phosphatase protein A conjugate
(Calbiochem). We developed the membranes using a colorigenic substrate
combination (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate/nitro blue tetrazolium; Boehringer Mannheim).
Chemotaxis assay
Log-phase vegetative cells were washed three times with Na/K phosphate
buffer and resuspended at a density of 2–3⫻106 cells/ml in Na/K
phosphate buffer and pulsed for 5 h with 30 nM cAMP every 10 min
(Devreotes et al., 1987; Mann and Firtel, 1987; Saxe et al., 1991).
Pulsed cells were plated in Na/K phosphate buffer at a density of 6⫻104
cells/cm2 onto a plate with a hole covered by a 0.17 mm glass coverslip.
A Eppendorf Patchman micromanipulator with a glass capillary needle
(Eppendorf Femtotip) filled with 150 μM cAMP solution was brought
into the field of view of an inverted microscope. The response of the
cells was followed by time-lapse video recording.
Image acquisition
Dictyostelium cells were developed on Na/K phosphate agar plates at a
density of 4⫻106 cells/cm2 and recorded with a CCD72S video camera
(DAGE MTI, Michigan City, MI) using a Nikon Optiphot-2 microscope
and a 4⫻ phase-contrast lens. Individual frames were captured into a

2103

R.Meili et al.
image processing program (NIH Image) with the help of a SCION
frame-grabber board.
Visible light images of chemotaxing cells were taken with a Nikon
Eclipse TE 300 inverted microscope equipped for DIC-imaging with a
Plan Fluor ELWD 2⫻/0.45 or Plan Fluor ELWD 4⫻/0.60 lens. Individual
frames were captured from a CCD72S video camera into a image
processing program (NIH Image) with the help of a SCION framegrabber board.
Fluorescence pictures were obtained with the same equipment but
using a RC300 video camera (DAGE MTI, Michigan City, MI) capable
of on-chip integration. The pictures were acquired with IPLab Spectrum,
Scanalytics, by integrating for 2–8 s.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank members of the Firtel laboratory, particularly
Chang Chung and Jason Brown, for helpful discussions. We would also
like to thank Jennifer Roth and Jason Brown for helpful suggestions on
the manuscript. R.M. was funded, in part, by grants from the Swiss
National Science Foundation and the Novartis Stiftung. This work was
funded by research grants from the USPHS to R.A.F.

References
Abu-Elneel,K., Karchi,M. and Ravid,S. (1996) Dictyostelium myosin II
is regulated during chemotaxis by a novel protein kinase C. J. Biol.
Chem., 271, 977–984.
Alessi,D., Andjelkovic,M., Caudwell,B., Cron,P., Morrice,N., Cohen,P.
and Hemmings,B. (1996) Mechanism of activation of protein kinase B
by insulin and IGF-1. EMBO J., 15, 6541–6551.
Alessi,D. et al. (1997a) 3-Phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1
(PDK1): structural and functional homology with the Drosophila
DSTPK61 kinase. Curr. Biol., 7, 776–789.
Alessi,D., James,S., Downes,C., Holmes,A., Gaffney,P., Reese,C. and
Cohen,P. (1997b) Characterization of a 3-phosphoinositide-dependent
protein kinase which phosphorylates and activates protein kinase Bα.
Curr. Biol., 7, 261–269.
Andjelkovic,M., Jones,P.F., Grossniklaus,U., Cron,P., Schier,A.F.,
Dick,M., Bilbe,G. and Hemmings,B.A. (1995) Developmental
regulation of expression and activity of multiple forms of the
Drosophila RAC protein kinase. J. Biol. Chem., 270, 4066–4075.
Andjelkovic,M. et al. (1997) Role of translocation in the activation and
function of protein kinase B. J. Biol. Chem., 272, 31515–31524.
Bellacosa,A., Testa,J., Staal,S. and Tsichlis,P. (1991) A retroviral
oncogene, akt, encoding a serine-threonine kinase containing an SH2like region. Science, 254, 274–277.
Buczynski,G., Grove,B., Nomura,A., Kleve,M., Bush,J., Firtel,R.A. and
Cardelli,J. (1997) Inactivation of two Dictyostelium discoideum genes,
DdPIK1 and DdPIK2, encoding proteins related to mammalian
phosphatidylinositide 3-kinases, results in defects in endocytosis,
lysosome to postlysosome transport and actin cytoskeleton
organization. J. Cell Biol., 136, 1271–1286.
Burgering,B. and Coffer,P. (1995) Protein kinase B (c-Akt) in
phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase signal transduction. Nature, 376,
599–602.
Buser,C., Sigal,C., Resh,M. and McLaughlin,S. (1994) Membrane
binding of myristylated peptides corresponding to the NH2 terminus
of Src. Biochemistry, 33, 13093–13101.
Chen,M.Y., Insall,R.H. and Devreotes,P.N. (1996) Signaling through
chemoattractant receptors in Dictyostelium. Trends Genet., 12, 52–57.
Chen,M.Y., Long,Y. and Devreotes,P.N. (1997) A novel cytosolic
regulator, pianissimo, is required for chemoattractant receptor and G
protein-mediated activation of the 12 transmembrane domain adenylyl
cyclase in Dictyostelium. Genes Dev., 11, 3218–3231.
Coffer,P. and Woodgett,J. (1991) Molecular cloning and characterization
of a novel putative protein-serine kinase related to the cAMPdependent and protein kinase C families. Eur. J. Biochem., 201,
475–481.
Cross,D., Alessi,D., Cohen,P., Anjelkovich,M. and Hemmings,B. (1995)
Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 by insulin mediated by
protein kinase B. Nature, 378, 785–789.
Dembinsky,A., Rubin,H. and Ravid,S. (1996) Chemoattractant-mediated
increases in cGMP induce changes in Dictyostelium myosin II heavy
chain-specific protein kinase C activities. J. Cell Biol., 134, 911–921.

2104

Deprez,J., Vertommen,D., Alessi,D., Hue,L. and Roder,M. (1997)
Phosphorylation and activation of heart 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase by
protein kinase B and other protein kinases of the insulin signaling
cascades. J. Biol. Chem., 272, 17269–17275.
Devreotes,P., Fontana,D., Klein,P., Sherring,J. and Theibert,A. (1987)
Transmembrane signaling in Dictyostelium. Methods Cell Biol., 28,
299–331.
Dudek,H., Datta,S., Franke,T., Birnbaum,M., Yao,R., Cooper,G.,
Segal,R., Kaplan,D. and Greenberg,M. (1997) Regulation of neuronal
survival by the serine-threonine protein kinase Akt. Science, 31,
661–665.
Firtel,R.A. (1995) Integration of signaling information in controlling
cell-fate decisions in Dictyostelium. Genes Dev., 9, 1427–1444.
Firtel,R.A. (1996) Interacting signaling pathways controlling
multicellular development in Dictyostelium. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.,
6, 545–554.
Franke,T., Yang,S., Chan,T., Datta,K., Kazlauskas,A., Morrison,D.,
Kaplan,D. and Tsichlis,P. (1995) The protein kinase encoded by the
Akt proto-oncogene is a target of the PDGF-activated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Cell, 81, 727–736.
Frech,M., Andjelkovich,M., Ingley,E., Reddy,K., Falck,J. and
Hemmings,B. (1997) High affinity binding of inositol phosphatase
and phosphoinositides to the pleckstrin homology domain of RAC/
protein kinase B and their influence on kinase activity. J. Biol. Chem.,
272, 8474–8481.
Gaskins,C., Clark,A.M., Aubry,L., Segall,J.E. and Firtel,R.A. (1996) The
Dictyostelium MAP kinase ERK2 regulates multiple, independent
developmental pathways. Genes Dev., 10, 118–128.
Ginsburg,G.T., Gollop,R., Yu,Y.M., Louis,J.M., Saxe,C.L. and
Kimmel,A.R. (1995) The regulation of Dictyostelium development by
transmembrane signalling. J. Eukaryot. Microbiol., 42, 200–205.
Harlow,E. and Lane,D. (1988) Antibodies: A Laboratory Manual. Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York, NY.
Insall,R., Kuspa,A., Lilly,P.J., Shaulsky,G., Levin,L.R., Loomis,W.F. and
Devreotes,P. (1994a) CRAC, a cytosolic protein containing a pleckstrin
homology domain, is required for receptor and G protein-mediated
activation of adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium. J. Cell Biol., 126,
1537–1545.
Insall,R.H., Soede,R.D.M., Schaap,P. and Devreotes,P.N. (1994b) Two
cAMP receptors activate common signaling pathways in Dictyostelium.
Mol. Biol. Cell, 5, 703–711.
Insall,R.H., Borleis,J. and Devreotes,P.N. (1996) The aimless RasGEF
is required for processing of chemotactic signals through G-proteincoupled receptors in Dictyostelium. Curr. Biol., 6, 719–729.
Jones,P., Jakubowicz,T., Pitossi,F., Maurer,F. and Hemmings,B. (1991)
Molecular cloning and identification of a serine/threonine protein
kinase of the second-messenger subfamily. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
88, 4171–4175.
Kauffmann-Zeh,A., Rodriguez-Viciana,P., Ulrich,E., Gilbert,C.,
Coffer,P., Downward,J. and Evan,G. (1997) Suppression of c-Mycinduced apoptosis by Ras signalling through PI(3)K and PKB. Nature,
385, 544–558.
Kennedy,S., Wagner,A., Conzen,S., Jordan,J., Bellacosa,A., Tsichlis,P.
and Hay,N. (1997) The PI 3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway delivers
an anti-apoptotic signal. Genes Dev., 11, 701–713.
Kim,J.Y., Soede,R.D.M., Schaap,P., Valkema,R., Borleis,J.A., Van
Haastert,P.J.M., Devreotes,P.N. and Hereld,D. (1997) Phosphorylation
of chemoattractant receptors is not essential for chemotaxis or
termination of G-protein-mediated responses. J. Biol. Chem., 272,
27313–27318.
Klippel,A., Kavanaugh,W., Pot,D. and Williams,L. (1997) A specific
product of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase directly activates the protein
kinase Akt through its pleckstrin homology domain. Mol. Cell. Biol.,
17, 338–344.
Kohn,A., Summers,S., Birnbaum,M. and Roth,R. (1996) Expression of
a constitutively active Akt Ser/Thr kinase in 3T3-L1 adipocytes
stimulates glucose uptake and glucose transporter 4 translocation.
J. Biol. Chem., 271, 31372–31378.
Kulik,G., Klippel,A. and Weber,M. (1997) Antiapoptotic signalling by
the insulin-like growth factor I receptor, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
and Akt. Mol. Cell. Biol., 17, 1595–1606.
Kuwayama,H. and Van Haastert,P.J.M. (1996) Regulation of guanylyl
cyclase by a cGMP-binding protein during chemotaxis in Dictyostelium
discoideum. J. Biol. Chem., 271, 23718–23724.
Lefebvre,V., Mechin,M., Louckx,M., Rider,M. and Hue,L. (1996)
Signaling pathway involved in the activation of heart 6-phosphofructo2-kinase by insulin. J. Biol. Chem., 271, 22289–22292.

Regulation of Akt/PKB
Ma,A.D., Metjian,A., Bagrodia,S., Taylor,S. and Abrams,C.S. (1998)
Cytoskeletal reorganization by G protein-coupled receptors is
dependent on phosphoinositide 3-kinase γ, a Rac guanosine exchange
factor and Rac. Mol. Cell. Biol., 18, 4744–4751.
Ma,H., Gamper,M., Parent,C. and Firtel,R.A. (1997) The Dictyostelium
MAP kinase kinase DdMEK1 regulates chemotaxis and is essential
for chemoattractant-mediated activation of guanylyl cyclase. EMBO J.,
16, 4317–4332.
Maeda,M., Aubry,L., Insall,R., Gaskins,C., Devreotes,P.N. and
Firtel,R.A. (1996) Seven helix chemoattractant receptors transiently
stimulate mitogen-activated protein kinase in Dictyostelium: Role of
heterotrimeric G proteins. J. Biol. Chem., 271, 3351–3354.
Mann,S.K.O. and Firtel,R.A. (1987) Cyclic AMP regulation of early
gene expression in Dictyostelium discoideum: Mediation via the cell
surface cyclic AMP receptor. Mol. Cell. Biol., 7, 458–469.
Milne,J.L. and Devreotes,P.N. (1993) The surface cyclic AMP receptors,
cAR1, cAR2 and cAR3, promote Ca2⫹ influx in Dictyostelium
discoideum by a Gα2-independent mechanism. Mol. Biol. Cell, 4,
283–292.
Milne,J.L.S., Wu,L.J., Caterina,M.J. and Devreotes,P.N. (1995) Seven
helix cAMP receptors stimulate Ca2⫹ entry in the absence of functional
G proteins in Dictyostelium. J. Biol. Chem., 270, 5926–5931.
Murga,C., Laguinge,L., Wetzker,R., Cuadrado,A. and Gutkind,J. (1998)
Activation of Akt/protein kinase B by G protein-coupled receptors.
J. Biol. Chem., 273, 19080–19085.
Newell,P.C. (1995) Signal transduction and motility of Dictyostelium.
Biosci. Rep., 15, 445–462.
Noegel,A.A. and Luna,J.E. (1995) The Dictyostelium cytoskeleton.
Experientia, 51, 1135–1143.
Pagh,K., Maruta,H., Claviez,M. and Gerisch,G. (1984) Localization
of two phosphorylation sites adjacent to a region important for
polymerization on the tail of Dictyostelium myosin. EMBO J., 3,
3271–3278.
Paradis,S. and Ruvkun,G. (1998) Caenorhabditis elegans Akt/PKB
transduces insulin receptor-like signals from AGE-1 PI3 kinase to the
DAF-16 transcription factor. Genes Dev., 12, 2488–2498.
Parent,C.A. and Devreotes,P.N. (1996) Molecular genetics of signal
transduction in Dictyostelium. Annu. Rev. Biochem., 65, 411–440.
Parent,C.A., Blacklock,B.J., Froehlich,W.M., Murphy,D.B. and
Devreotes,P.N. (1998) G protein signaling events are activated at the
leading edge of chemotactic cells. Cell, 95, 81–91.
Saxe,C.L.,III, Johnson,R.L., Devreotes,P.N. and Kimmel,A.R. (1991)
Expression of a cAMP receptor gene of Dictyostelium and evidence
for a multigene family. Genes Dev., 5, 1–8.
Schnitzler,G.R., Fischer,W.H. and Firtel,R.A. (1994) Cloning and
characterization of the G-box binding factor, an essential component
of the developmental switch between early and late development in
Dictyostelium. Genes Dev., 8, 502–514.
Schnitzler,G.R., Briscoe,C., Brown,J.M. and Firtel,R.A. (1995)
Serpentine cAMP receptors may act through a G protein-independent
pathway to induce postaggregative development in Dictyostelium.
Cell, 81, 737–745.
Segall,J.E., Kuspa,A., Shaulsky,G., Ecke,M., Maeda,M., Gaskins,C. and
Firtel,R.A. (1995) A MAP kinase necessary for receptor-mediated
activation of adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium. J. Cell Biol., 128,
405–413.
Sigal,C., Zhou,W., Buser,C., McLaughlin,S. and Resh,M. (1994) Aminoterminal basic residues of Src mediate membrane binding through
electrostatic interaction with acidic phospholipids. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA, 91, 12253–12257.
Soll,D. and Voss,E. (1998) Two- and three-dimensional computer systems
for analyzing how animal cells crawl. In Soll,D. and Wessels,D. (eds),
Motion Analysis of Living Cells. Wiley-Liss, New York, NY, pp. 25–52.
Stephens,L. et al. (1998) Protein kinase B kinases that mediate
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate-dependent activation of protein
kinase B. Science, 279, 710–714.
Stockoe,D., Stephens,L., Copeland,T., Gaffney,P., Reese,C., Painter,G.,
Holmes,A., McCormick,F. and Hawkins,P. (1997) Dual role of
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate in the activation of protein
kinase B. Science, 277, 567–570.
Sutoh,K. (1993) A transformation vector for Dictyostelium discoideum
with a new selectable marker Bsr. Plasmid, 30, 150–154.
Tuxworth,R.I., Cheetham,J.L., Machesky,L.M., Spiegelmann,G.B.,
Weeks,G. and Insall,R.H. (1997) Dictyostelium RasG is required for
normal motility and cytokinesis, but not growth. J. Cell Biol., 138,
605–614.

Van Haastert,P.J.M. (1995) Transduction of the chemotactic cAMP signal
across the plasma membrane of Dictyostelium cells. Experientia, 51,
1144–1154.
Van Haastert,P.J.M. and Van der Heijden,P.R. (1983) Excitation
adaptation and deadaptation of the cAMP mediated cGMP response
in Dictyostelium discoideum. J. Cell Biol., 96, 347–353.
Van Haastert,P.J.M. and Kuwayama,H. (1997) cGMP as second
messenger during Dictyostelium chemotaxis. FEBS Lett., 410, 25–28.
Vanhaesbroeck,B., Leevers,S., Panayotou,G. and Waterfield,M. (1997)
Phosphoinositide 3-kinases: a conserved family of signal transducers.
Trends Biochem. Sci., 22, 267–272.
Vlahos,C.J., Matter,W., Hui,K.Y. and Brown,R.F. (1994) A specific
inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, 2-(4-morpholinyl)-8phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-1 (LY294002). J. Biol. Chem., 269,
5241–5248.
Wu,L.J., Valkema,R.,Van Haastert,P.J.M. and Devreotes,P.N. (1995)
The G protein β subunit is essential for multiple responses to
chemoattractants in Dictyostelium. J. Cell Biol., 129, 1667–1675.
Xiao,Z. and Devreotes,P.N. (1997) Identification of detergent-resistant
plasma membrane microdomains in Dictyostelium: Enrichment of
signal transduction proteins. Mol. Biol. Cell, 8, 855–869.
Xiao,Z., Zhang,N., Murphy,D.B. and Devreotes,P.N. (1997) Dynamic
distribution of chemoattractant receptors in living cells during
chemotaxis and persistent stimulation. J. Cell Biol., 139, 365–374.
Zhou,K.M., Takegawa,K., Emr,S.D. and Firtel,R.A. (1995) A
phosphatidylinositol (PI) kinase gene family in Dictyostelium
discoideum: Biological roles of putative mammalian p110 and yeast
Vps34p PI 3-kinase homologs during growth and development. Mol.
Cell. Biol., 15, 5645–5656.
Zhou,K., Pandol,S., Bokoch,G. and Traynor-Kaplan,A.E. (1998)
Disruption of Dictyostelium PI3K genes reduces [32P]phosphatidylinositol 3,4 bisphosphate and [32P]phosphatidylinositol trisphosphate
levels, alters F-actin distribution and impairs pinocytosis. J. Cell Sci.,
111, 283–294.
Zigmond,S.H., Joyce,M., Borleis,J., Bokoch,G.M. and Devreotes,P.N.
(1997) Regulation of actin polymerization in cell-free systems by
GTPγS and Cdc42. J. Cell Biol., 138, 363–374.
Received December 14, 1998; revised and accepted February 24, 1999

2105

