Cell, Vol. 95, 81–91, October 2, 1998, Copyright 1998 by Cell Press

G Protein Signaling Events Are Activated
at the Leading Edge of Chemotactic Cells
Carole A. Parent,* Brenda J. Blacklock,*§
Wendy M. Froehlich,* Douglas B. Murphy,†
and Peter N. Devreotes*‡
* Department of Biological Chemistry
† Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy
Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine
Baltimore, Maryland 21205

Summary
Directional sensing by eukaryotic cells does not require polarization of chemoattractant receptors. The
translocation of the PH domain–containing protein
CRAC in D. discoideum to binding sites on the inner
face of the plasma membrane reflects activation of
the G protein–linked signaling system. Increments in
chemoattractant elicit a uniform response around the
cell periphery. Yet when cells are exposed to a gradient, the activation occurs selectively at the stimulated
edge, even in immobilized cells. We propose that such
localized activation, transmitted by the recruitment of
cytosolic proteins, may be a general mechanism for
gradient sensing by G protein–linked chemotactic systems including those involving chemotactic cytokines
in leukocytes.

Introduction
How do cells in multicellular organisms find and maintain their appropriate locations? Increasing evidence
suggests that directed cell movement, or chemotaxis,
plays a more significant role than previously thought.
This essential physiological process is displayed by
many eukaryotic cells including keratinocytes, endothelial cells, neurons, and cells of the immune system (Downey, 1994; Lauffenburger and Horwitz, 1996; Baggiolini,
1998). Phagocytic cells, including leukocytes and freeliving amoebae such as D. discoideum, although evolutionarily distant, share remarkable similarities in behavior as well as in the molecular components involved in
chemotaxis (Devreotes and Zigmond, 1988; Chen et al.,
1996). Both cell types exhibit a polarized shape, move
by pseudopod extension, and sense gradients through
a series of repeated excitation and adaptation events.
Most interestingly, their chemotactic responses appear
to be mediated via a common set of G protein–linked
signaling events. This conservation, coupled with its
accessible genetics and biochemistry, make D. discoideum an excellent model to study the mechanism of
chemotaxis (Parent and Devreotes, 1996a).
Whereas bacterial chemotaxis is relatively well understood, the mechanisms by which eukaryotic cells sense
‡ To whom correspondence should be addressed (e-mail: pnd@

welchlink.welch.jhu.edu).
§ Present address: Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 45056.

chemical gradients have remained cryptic. In prokaryotes, directed cell movement is mediated by the temporal regulation of a two-component histidine kinase signaling system that controls the direction of flagellar
rotation (Alex and Simon, 1994). Cells moving up the
gradient experience an increase in receptor occupancy
and “swim” longer, while those choosing the wrong direction encounter a decrease in receptor occupancy
and “tumble” sooner (Koshland, 1977). Eukaryotic cells
also respond temporally to increases in receptor occupancy. Indeed, in leukocytes and amoebae, stimulus
increments elicit sharp rises in the proportion of polymerized actin, in IP3 and Ca21 levels, as well as the
phosphorylation of myosins, the production of intracellular cAMP, and the activation of MAPK and STAT (Devreotes and Zigmond, 1988; Caterina and Devreotes,
1991; Thompson et al., 1994; Lai et al., 1996; Maeda et
al., 1996; Parent and Devreotes, 1996a; Krump et al.,
1997; Araki et al., 1998). All of these responses are transient and reoccur with each increase in receptor occupancy. However, in contrast to bacteria, where there is
no communication between the “front” and the “back”
of the cell, eukaryotic cells appear to also be capable
of spatial sensing. When a stimulus is applied, both
leukocytes and amoebae preferentially extend pseudopods up the gradient, suggesting that they have the
ability to sense the surrounding chemoattractant concentration prior to moving (Zigmond, 1974; Zigmond et
al., 1981; Devreotes and Zigmond, 1988).
In order for cells to sense gradients, some of the
signaling proteins must become asymmetrically distributed or activated. In D. discoideum the localization of
several cytoskeletal and signal transduction components in chemotaxing cells has been studied using GFP
technology and immunohistochemical staining. Actin,
coronin, talin, cofilin, and CAP (cyclase-associated-protein) have all been shown to transiently accumulate at
the leading edge (Gerisch et al., 1995; Kreitmeier et al.,
1995; Gottwald et al., 1996; Aizawa et al., 1997; Westphal
et al., 1997). These cytoskeletal rearrangements have
been proposed to be mediated by an asymmetric distribution of chemoattractant receptors and/or G proteins.
However, studies using GFP fusion proteins, have shown
that neither chemoattractant receptors nor G protein
b–subunits become unevenly distributed during chemotaxis (Xiao et al., 1997; T. Jin et al., unpublished results;
G. Servant and H. Bourne, personal communication).
Therefore, it must be the activation of the G protein–
linked signaling pathways that preferentially occurs at
the leading edge of chemotaxing cells.
In an effort to better understand how cells sense
chemical gradients, we set out to visualize signaling
events using a GFP-fusion protein known to be recruited
to the plasma membrane following chemoattractant receptor stimulation. CRAC (cytosolic regulator of adenylyl cyclase), a novel protein that contains a PH domain
at its N terminal, must be translocated to the plasma
membrane during each transient activation of adenylyl
cyclase (Insall et al., 1994). Biochemical and genetic
analyses have shown that the receptor-mediated redistribution of CRAC does not take place in cells lacking

Cell
82

Figure 1. The CRAC-GFP Fusion Protein Retains Wild-Type Activity
(A) Developmental phenotype of crac2 and CRAC-GFP/crac2 cells
on nonnutrient agar. Photographs were taken 24 hr after the cells
were plated. Bar represents 8 mm.
(B) Western analysis of whole cells (total), supernatant (supnt), and
pellet fractions after lysis and centrifugation. Samples were loaded
on 7.5% SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted using an antibody directed
against GFP. The multiple bands correspond to the fusion protein
(see Experimental Procedures).

the unique G protein b–subunit expressed in these cells,
suggesting that the CRAC-binding site is either Gbg or
that the generation of the CRAC binding site requires
Gbg (Lilly and Devreotes, 1995). By using the relocalization of CRAC as a marker to report the spatial and temporal activation of G protein–coupled signaling, we
sought to gain insights into the mechanisms of directed
cell movement.
Results
The CRAC-GFP Fusion Protein Retains
Wild-Type Activity
Cyclic AMP plays a critical role in the early development
of D. discoideum during which 105 cells spontaneously
aggregate and differentiate to form multicellular structures (Parent and Devreotes, 1996a). Cells lacking CRAC
do not produce cAMP because they cannot mediate
G protein–coupled activation of adenylyl cyclase and
therefore remain as smooth monolayers of single cells
(Insall et al., 1994). Rescue of the aggregation defect in
crac2 cells thus provides a stringent test for the integrity
of the CRAC-GFP fusion protein. The crac2 cells were
stably transfected with the CRAC-GFP expression plasmid, and a few clones were selected, expanded, and
tested for differentiation by depositing washed cells on
nonnutrient agar plates. Figure 1A depicts the developmental phenotype of the crac2 and CRAC-GFP/crac2
cells. Expression of CRAC-GFP in crac2 cells suppressed the aggregation-deficient phenotype and led
to the formation of differentiated structures. A GFP antibody specifically recognized bands of z110 kDa only in

CRAC-GFP/crac2 cells. Crude subcellular fractionation
showed that, as is the case with CRAC, CRAC-GFP was
almost entirely found in the cytoplasmic fraction of cells
(Figure 1B).
The biochemical properties of the CRAC-GFP/crac2
cells were characterized by measuring G protein–mediated adenylyl cyclase activity. In lysates of crac2 cells
the ratio of GTPgS-stimulated to basal adenylyl cyclase
activity was 1.9, while in lysates of CRAC-GFP/crac2
cells it was greater than 30 (data not shown). This extent
of activation is comparable to that displayed by wildtype AX3 cells. To further characterize the activity of the
CRAC-GFP fusion protein, supernatants prepared from
wild-type AX3 cells or CRAC-GFP/crac2 cells were used
to reconstitute the GTPgS-stimulated activity of lysates
derived from crac2 cells. Each of these supernatants
restored the GTPgS-mediated activation of adenylyl cyclase to wild-type levels (data not shown). Taken together, these results show that the wild-type and GFPtagged CRAC proteins are essentially interchangeable.
Chemoattractants Cause a Transient Translocation
of CRAC-GFP from the Cytosol
to the Plasma Membrane
As predicted from the subcellular fractionation data, nonstimulated, differentiated CRAC-GFP/crac2 cells showed
an even cytoplasmic fluorescent signal when observed
by conventional fluorescence microscopy (Figure 1B,
Figure 2 upper panel). When the cells were stimulated
by the addition of a saturating dose of cAMP (1 mM), a
dramatic translocation of CRAC-GFP from the cytosol to
the plasma membrane ensued. The relocalization began
instantaneously after the addition of the stimulus and
peaked within 5–10 s. By 30–40 s the original uniform
cytoplasmic distribution was reestablished (Figure 2,
upper panel). Similar responses were observed when
the cells were stimulated with concentrations of cAMP
as low as 1 nM (data not shown). This translocation
event occurred specifically following receptor activation. During random movement little or no change in the
overall signal was observed even at the tips of extended
pseudopods where many cytoskeletal proteins are known
to accumulate.
Quantification of the stimulus-induced translocation
response showed that the enrichment of CRAC-GFP at
the plasma membrane resulted in a depletion in the
amount of CRAC-GFP in the cytoplasm. The bottom
panel of Figure 2 shows the difference in fluorescence
intensities before and after the addition of chemoattractant at points along a line through the central portion of
the cell. As depicted by the three basal readings, the
distribution of the signal did not change in unstimulated
cells. However, a dramatic increase in the fluorescent
signal at the periphery of the cell coupled to a reduction
in the intracellular signal was observed following receptor stimulation (for clarity only the peak translocation
point is presented). The transient kinetics of the translocation event is illustrated in the inset as a measure of
the peak fluorescent signals measured at the periphery
of the cells. These results show that CRAC-GFP is a
highly sensitive marker that can be used to visualize
activated G protein–coupled signaling pathways.

Polarized G Protein Signaling in Directed Cell Movement
83

Figure 2. Kinetic Analysis of the Chemoattractant-Mediated Translocation of CRAC-GFP
(Top panel) Montage of images of Redi CRAC-GFP/crac2 cells taken before and after the addition of 1 mM cAMP, a saturating dose of
chemoattractant. Numbers in the lower left corner are seconds before and after stimulation. Chemoattractant was added at time 0 (note that
the cell goes out of focus in this frame). Calibration bar represents 6 mm. An animated version of this experiment can be found in the
supplemental data section of the on-line version of the journal (http://www.cell.com/supplemental/95/1/81). Similar results were observed in
over 30 independent sessions.
(Bottom panel) Quantitative analysis of the translocation event. Fluorescence intensities were measured along a thin line through the central
portion of the cell (see schematic representation on frame taken at 24 s on the top panel). Intensities from the 22 s frame were subtracted
from each of the other frames and plotted. For clarity, only the 6 s time point is presented. The % receptor occupancy is illustrated as 100%
across the length of the cell. The kinetics of the translocation event is presented as a measure of the area under the curve of the florescent
signal at the left periphery of the cell for each time point (inset). Similar results were obtained by analysis of at least five cells recorded on
different days.

To determine whether actin polymerization was required for the translocation of CRAC-GFP to the plasma
membrane, we pretreated the cells with agents that prevent de novo actin filament polymerization. Latrunculin
A or Cytochalasin A were used at final concentrations
of 0.5 mM and 1 mM, respectively. A 3–5 min pretreatment
with either drug left the cells rounded up and immobile
(see below and Figure 6A). When these cells were stimulated with a uniform increase of chemoattractant at a
final concentration of 10 mM, a robust translocation of
the fluorescent signal to the plasma membrane occurred
(data not shown). Thus, the transient relocalization of

CRAC-GFP to the plasma membrane does not require
reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton.

CRAC-GFP Is Associated with Membrane Fractions
following Chemoattractant Receptor Stimulation
The association of CRAC-GFP with the plasma membrane observed in living cells was also apparent in membranes collected from lysed cells. CRAC-GFP/crac2
cells were stimulated with cAMP, and at specific times,
aliquots of cells were lysed and quickly processed for
membrane isolation and immunoblotting. The amount

Cell
84

calculated that, at the peak stimulation, z10% of total
CRAC-GFP was associated with membranes.
As is the case for the translocation of CRAC-GFP to
the plasma membrane, chemoattractant-mediated activation of adenylyl cyclase is also transient. Previously
published data have shown that the kinetics of enzyme
activation are slower than the rapid redistribution of
CRAC-GFP (Theibert and Devreotes, 1986; Lilly and Devreotes, 1995). To further define this possible lag between
CRAC translocation and peak enzyme activity, each response was measured in parallel at short time points
following chemoattractant addition. Figure 3A shows
that the chemoattractant-mediated activation of adenylyl cyclase indeed peaks about 60 s after receptor
stimulation, as was previously observed. Consequently,
while CRAC-GFP translocates quickly after receptor
stimulation, the maximum activation of adenylyl cyclase
occurs slightly later suggesting that there are additional
steps between CRAC translocation and the activation
of adenylyl cyclase.

Figure 3. Biochemical and Functional Analysis of CRAC-GFP
(A) Redi CRAC-GFP/crac2 cells were stimulated with 10 mM cAMP,
and at specific times, aliquots of cells were lysed and processed
for membrane isolation and immunoblotting or assayed for adenylyl
cyclase activity. The closed diamonds represent a densitometric
analysis of the translocation of CRAC-GFP to the membrane fractions. The open squares depict the adenylyl cyclase activity.
(B) Basal, unregulated (MnSO4), and G protein–mediated (GTPgS)
activation of adenylyl cyclase in CRAC/crac2, D-CRAC/crac2, and
W167A-CRAC/crac2 (see Experimental Procedures).
(C) Amount of CRAC, D-CRAC, or W167A-CRAC that becomes associated with membrane fractions following chemoattractant addition.
Cells were stimulated and processed for membrane isolation and
immunoblotting as in (A). The results presented here are representative of at least two independent experiments.

of CRAC-GFP associated with membrane fractions transiently increased following chemoattractant addition,
with kinetics that paralleled those observed by fluorescence microscopy. Taking aliquots at 10 s intervals revealed that the translocation is rapid and subsides about
40 s after the addition of the stimulus (Figure 3A). Quantification of the signal by densitometry routinely showed
a 5- to 10-fold increase in the amount of CRAC-GFP
translocated to the plasma membrane. Moreover, we

The PH Domain Appears to Be Required for
Recruitment to the Plasma Membrane
To assess the molecular determinants involved in the
translocation of CRAC to the plasma membrane, we
studied two CRAC mutants. First we engineered a point
mutation in the PH domain of CRAC by substituting the
Trp residue conserved in all PH domain sequences to
an Ala residue (W167A). This Trp residue is located on
the C-terminal a helix, buried within the b sandwich
of the structure, and is postulated to contribute to the
stability of the entire PH domain (Ferguson et al., 1994,
1995). Second, we used a mutant of CRAC, isolated
from a chemical mutagenesis screen as an aggregationdeficient clone, which harbored an in-frame 53 amino
acid deletion of residues 467 to 518 near the C terminal
(D-CRAC) (P. J. Lilly et al., unpublished results). Although
CRAC, W167A-CRAC, and D-CRAC transformed in crac2
cells expressed protein, only cells transformed with the
wild-type version of CRAC successfully rescued the aggregation-deficient phenotype of crac2 cells (data not
shown). Neither W167A-CRAC nor D-CRAC/crac2 transformants showed significant GTPgS-mediated activation of adenylyl cyclase (Figure 3B). We next assessed
the amount of wild-type or mutant CRAC that became
associated with membranes following chemoattractant
addition. As shown in Figure 3C, D-CRAC displayed a
transient association with the membrane fraction following cAMP treatment, while the mutant harboring a point
mutation in the PH domain failed to do so. Thus, while
neither mutant protein was able to activate adenylyl
cyclase, only the one bearing a mutation in the PH domain was unable to associate with membranes in response to cAMP. These results suggest that CRAC has
at least two distinct functional domains and that translocation is necessary but not sufficient for the activation
of adenylyl cyclase.
CRAC-GFP Associates with the Plasma Membrane
at the Leading Edge of Chemotaxing Cells
CRAC-GFP appears to be a highly specific marker for
the visualization of G protein–coupled activation in living

Polarized G Protein Signaling in Directed Cell Movement
85

Figure 4. CRAC-GFP Translocates to the Leading Edge of Newly Elicited Pseudopods
(Top panel) Montage of confocal images of Redi CRAC-GFP/crac2 cells taken as the cells moved toward a micropipette containing 1 mM
cAMP. The pipette is located 25 mm above the upper right corner of the frames. Numbers in the upper left corner are seconds. Calibration
bar represents 5.6 mm. This behavior was consistently observed over the course of 15 independent sessions. An animated version of this
experiment can be found in the supplemental data section of the on-line version of the journal (http://www.cell.com/supplemental/95/1/81).
(Bottom panel) Quantitative analysis of the translocation event. Fluorescence intensities were measured along a thin line through the central
portion of the upper cell (see schematic representation on frame taken at 0 s on the top panel) and plotted as a function of distance. Similar
results were obtained by analysis of at least five cells recorded on different days. The dotted line depicts the estimated level of receptor
occupancy at different points assuming that the concentration at the midpoint of the cell is near Kd. If it were not near Kd, the changes would
be smaller. See Experimental Procedures for details.

cells. To study the spatial localization of signaling events
in chemotaxing cells, we placed the CRAC-GFP/crac2
cells in a gradient of cAMP and used a micropipette
to deliver a constant amount of chemoattractant at a
specific location on the cover glass. In this assay, cells
rapidly move toward the micropipette tip, which can be
repositioned to allow the formation of new chemotactic
fronts. As cells carried out chemotaxis, a redistribution
of CRAC-GFP from the cytosol to the plasma membrane
occurred exclusively on elicited pseudopods. In the sequence of events presented in the top panel of Figure
4, the micropipette containing 1 mM cAMP was placed
in the upper right corner and frames were captured every
5 s using confocal microscopy. As the cells were moving

toward the chemoattractant, an intense fluorescent signal was observed at the ruffling front of the cells. Note
that cells located closest to and furthest from the needle
display similar localization of the signal at the leading
edge. The association of CRAC-GFP with the plasma
membrane in chemotaxing cells was not continuous;
the three cells presented in Figure 4 show the appearance and disappearance of fluorescent signal at the
plasma membrane within a 20–40 s time frame. Quantification of the translocation event revealed that while
receptor occupancy changed only slightly across the
cell length (see Experimental Procedures), the CRACGFP signal was strongly enriched at the front of the cell.
The bottom panel of Figure 4 presents the change in

Cell
86

CRAC-GFP fluorescence intensity along a thin line
through the center of a cell. It is evident that a fraction
of CRAC is sharply relocalized at the leading edge and
that the remaining cytosolic CRAC is uniformly distributed along the length of the cell. Consequently, the
highly polarized redistribution of CRAC-GFP at the front
of chemotaxing cells greatly amplifies the small differences in receptor occupancy.
When we changed the position of the micropipette,
the cells either extended pseudopods from the original
migrating front and made a 1808 turn toward the newly
formed gradient or, alternatively, the cells created a new
front thereby reversing the direction of their movement
(Devreotes and Zigmond, 1988). Regardless, we always
detected a bright fluorescent signal solely on the plasma
membrane of the leading edge of the cell. For example,
in Figure 5A (top left panel), a cell is moving up a gradient
of cAMP toward the micropipette located above and to
the right of the frame. The pipette was then moved below
and to the left of the frame, and images were captured.
As the new cAMP gradient was restored, a chemotactic
front began to appear at the back of the cell and we
observed small amounts of CRAC-GFP on the plasma
membrane. By 200 s, a new leading edge was firmly
established and showed a bright fluorescent signal.
We also observed the response of the cells to a falling
gradient. The pressure through the needle was first increased to a high level via the micropipette injector and
then released to allow reestablishment of the gradient.
Immediately upon increasing the pressure, a uniform
translocation of CRAC-GFP from the cytosol to the
plasma membrane occurred. As the gradient reestablished, the cells showed distinct polarized translocation
of CRAC-GFP and, within 70 s, the cells displayed robust
chemotaxis. An animated version of this experiment can
be found in the supplemental data section of the online version of the journal (http://www.cell.com/supple
mental/95/1/81). These results show the rapid and transient nature of the translocation event and underscore
the dynamics of the response when the cells are subjected to sudden changes in chemoattractant concentrations.
We next subjected cells to a brief increase in chemoattractant, which swept across the cells like a wave. In
these experiments, the micropipette was positioned
near a cell and at specific times a pulse of chemoattractant was released by applying a pressure increase on
the microinjector for only 5 s. As illustrated in Figure 5B,
the side of the cell that encountered the approaching
gradient responded by selectively translocating CRACGFP along the entire membrane facing the needle. The
cell also briefly extended a ruffled edge toward the micropipette. After repeating this stimulation routine three
times on the right side of the cell, the pipette was repositioned on the left side and similar directional translocations of CRAC-GFP were elicited (Figure 5B). These observations imply that cells must have mechanisms that
allow for the inhibition of the signal at their “back” even
when the concentration of chemoattractant is rapidly
increasing at both ends of the cell.
To further assess the role of cell movement in chemotaxis, we set out to measure if nonmotile cells retained
the capacity to perceive gradients. As noted above, de

Figure 5. Redistribution of CRAC-GFP after Repositioning of the
Micropipette and in Response to Brief Waves of Chemoattractant
(A) The upper left frame was taken as the Redi CRAC-GFP/crac2
were moving toward the micropipette, which was located at the
upper right corner of the image (the needle contained 1 mM cAMP).
The needle was then moved to the lower left corner, and within 1
min, sequential images were captured. Numbers in the upper left
corner are seconds after the observation began. Calibration bar
represents 6 mm. This behavior was consistently observed over five
independent sessions.
(B) A micropipette containing 1 mM cAMP was positioned near Redi
CRAC-GFP/crac2 cells, and a brief pulse of chemoattractant was
released by applying a pressure increase on the microinjector for
5 s. The numbers in the upper left corner are seconds after the
chemoattractant was released. The micropipette was placed on the
right side of the cell for the top three panels and on the left side of
the cell for the bottom three panels. Calibration bar represents 7.6
mm. This behavior was observed in at least four independent sessions. Animated versions of these experiments can be found in the
supplemental data section of the on-line version of the journal
(http://www.cell.com/supplemental/95/1/81).

novo actin polymerization is not required for the translocation event to occur in response to a uniform increase
in chemoattractant. We now wanted to assess whether

Polarized G Protein Signaling in Directed Cell Movement
87

actin polymerization was needed to locally activate G
protein–coupled signaling in cells exposed to a gradient.
In these experiments, cells moving in a gradient of cAMP
were treated with 0.5 mM Latrunculin A. After the addition of the drug, the cells gradually stopped extending
pseudopods, became progressively rounded, and eventually showed little motility. Surprisingly, even under
these conditions, the cells retained the ability to translocate CRAC-GFP specifically at the membrane directed
up the chemoattractant gradient (Figure 6A). Figure 6B
shows another field of cells examined approximately 20
min after the addition of Latrunculin A. The upper and
lower images, taken 90 s apart, illustrate that the cells
are essentially immobile. Even so, a strong fluorescent
signal was observed at the membrane facing the micropipette (the star depicts where the micropipette was
positioned). Although these results strongly suggest that
eukaryotic cells are able to perform spatial sensing, we
cannot rule out that slight superficial membrane ruffling
exhibited by the rounded cells is important for sensing
(see animated version of this experiment in the supplemental data section of the on-line version of the journal
[http://www.cell.com/supplemental/95/1/81]).
We have observed that CRAC-GFP is specifically redistributed to membranes when cells are stimulated with
chemoattractant. We also noted that CRAC is spontaneously associated with “crown-like” structures, thought
to be precursors of macropinosomes, in randomly moving vegetative cells. These circular ruffles are regions
where F actin accumulates along with the actin-binding
protein coronin and myosin IB (Fukui et al., 1989; Jung
and Hammer, 1990; Maniak et al., 1995). Figure 7 shows
resting vegetative cells displaying an even cytoplasmic
fluorescent signal with intense labeling of crowns. The
signal associated with these structures took the form
of rings and was present as the structures were forming
but dissipated as soon as the macropinosomes closed
and entered the cell. Developed cells had fewer macropinosomes and, when they were present, they behaved
independently of chemoattractant stimulation (see Figure 2, upper panel, bright structure on the lower right
corner of the cell). Furthermore, CRAC-GFP was associated with macropinosomes in the gb2 cells (data not
shown) where we have shown that chemoattractant
stimulation does not induce CRAC translocation (Lilly
and Devreotes, 1995).

Discussion
Our results demonstrate that in gradients of chemoattractant the activation of the G protein–coupled signaling system, reflected by the transient translocation of
CRAC-GFP to the membrane, is spatially localized.
Other observations have shown that chemoattractant
receptors and G protein subunits are uniformly localized
at the cell periphery (Xiao et al., 1997; T. Jin et al., unpublished results; G. Servant and H. Bourne, personal communication). Biochemical analysis has shown that the
stimulus-induced translocation of CRAC-GFP is an indication of the appearance of CRAC binding sites on the
inner face of the plasma membrane (Lilly and Devreotes,
1995 and see below). These sites appear transiently

Figure 6. Latrunculin A–Treated Cells Retain the Ability to Selectively Translocate CRAC-GFP at the Membrane Directed up the
Chemoattractant
Redi AX2 cells expressing CRAC-GFP were placed in a chamber.
(A) A micropipette containing 1 mM chemoattractant is located 10
mm below the lower edge of the field. At time 0, Latrunculin A
(final concentration 0.5 mM) was added and images were captured.
Numbers in the upper left corner are seconds before and after the
addition of Latrunculin A. Calibration bar represents 12 mm.
(B) These images, obtained from the same chamber as in (A), were
captured approximately 20 min after the addition of Latrunculin A.
The position of the micropipette is indicated by the asterisk. Numbers in the upper left corner are seconds. Calibration bar represents
9 mm. Animated versions of these experiments can be found in the
supplemental data section of the on-line version of the journal
(http://www.cell.com/supplemental/95/1/81).

Cell
88

Figure 7. CRAC-GFP Is Associated with Macropinosomes
CRAC-GFP/crac2 cells were harvested in their vegetative state,
washed once, resuspended in phosphate buffer, and directly observed using conventional microscopy. (A) and (B) were captured
at 10 s intervals. The cell shown in (C), (D), and (E) (also captured
every 10 s) comes from another field. The arrows point to macropinosomes. Calibration bar represents 8 mm. This behavior was observed
over the course of five independent sessions.

in response to uniform stimuli and asymmetrically in
response to gradients. Recruitment of a cytosolic protein to localized regions of activation, as we report here,
therefore provides a means to transmit already-localized
signals. We propose that such localized activation will
be a general phenomenon for G protein–linked signaling
chemotactic systems including those involving chemotactic cytokines in leukocytes.
Oancea et al. have shown that proteins harboring cysteine-rich domains from PKC become transiently associated with the membrane following G protein– or tyrosine kinase–coupled receptor stimulation (Oancea et al.,
1998). In other experiments, the activation of several
different G protein–coupled receptors caused the translocation of b-arrestin-GFP to the membrane, and the
guanine nucleotide exchange factor, ARNO, became associated with plasma membranes following treatment
with insulin (Barak et al., 1997; Venkateswarlu et al.,
1998). We report here the redistribution of a signaling
protein from the cytosol to the plasma membrane specifically at the leading edge of chemotaxing cells. Although
actin and several actin-binding proteins, including coronin, talin, cofilin, and CAP, become associated with newly
extended pseudopod extensions in D. discoideum cells,
this relocalization is observed in randomly moving, as
well as chemotaxing, cells, and the redistribution of coronin still occurs in gb- cells, which lack sensitivity to all
chemoattractants (Gerisch et al., 1995; Kreitmeier et al.,
1995; Gottwald et al., 1996; Aizawa et al., 1997; Westphal
et al., 1997; Peracino et al., 1998; T. Jin, N. Zhang, and
P. N. Devreotes, unpublished results). Moreover, while
the actin-binding proteins tend to fill the entire F-actin
rich region of the pseudopod, CRAC-GFP specifically
localizes to the plasma membrane at the front edge of
the projection. Thus, CRAC-GFP represents a specific
marker for the signal transduction events occurring at
the leading edge of chemotactically sensitive cells.

Several models for gradient sensing by eukaryotic cells
have been proposed (Devreotes and Zigmond, 1988;
Caterina and Devreotes, 1991). First, a “purely temporal”
model depicts cells as extending pilot sensors in all
directions, responding only to those extended up the
gradient. Second, a “spatial-temporal” model sees cells
as requiring temporal increases in receptor occupancy
to respond, but also needs inhibition to occur at the
side of the cell receiving a later or lower stimulus. Third,
a “purely spatial” model has cells capable of intrinsically
detecting differences in receptor occupancy between
its two ends, even when receptor occupancy shows
no temporal change. Our findings rule out the “purely
temporal” model since nonmotile cells are able to polarize their signal transduction responses (Figure 6).
Rather, our results favor the “purely spatial” model. For
spatial detection, cells must sense small differences in
receptor occupancy at their two ends. Hence, the need
for chemotaxing cells to express their receptors and
G proteins uniformly around the cell perimeter and to
possess mechanisms that allow rapid polarization of the
activation event.
We have a good understanding of the signal transduction events involved in the activation of adenylyl cyclase.
Chemoattractant-mediated activation of adenylyl cyclase requires, in addition to the G protein bg–subunits,
two novel cytosolic proteins: CRAC and Pianissimo (Insall et al., 1994; Chen et al., 1997). Following chemoattractant or GTPgS stimulation, it is thought that CRAC
binds to the plasma membrane and somehow, in concert
with Pianissimo, activates adenylyl cyclase. The data
presented here show that, in living cells, CRAC transiently associates with plasma membrane following
stimulation of chemoattractant receptors. This is consistent with previous reconstitution experiments that have
shown that the receptor- and GTPgS-mediated activation of adenylyl cyclase in crac2 cells can be restored
by adding exogenous supernatant preparations derived
from unstimulated cells (Lilly and Devreotes, 1995).
These biochemical experiments have also established
that (1) the GTPgS-induced association of CRAC with
membranes does not require chemoattractant receptor,
Ga2, or adenylyl cyclase, but depends essentially on
Gb, (2) stimulus-induced modifications of CRAC are not
required prior to binding, (3) the appearance of the binding sites is transient in the absence of CRAC, and (4)
once created in cells, the CRAC binding sites remain
stable in lysates. Since there is a lag of about 50 s
between the peak CRAC translocation event and maximal adenylyl cyclase activation, there must be additional
steps between the two events. These steps may involve
Pianissimo, since CRAC translocation takes place in piacells (B. J. B. and P. N. D., unpublished observation).
The identity of the CRAC binding site remains to be
established. Our mutant analysis showed that CRAC is
composed of at least two distinct functional domains.
A region in the C terminal is essential for adenylyl cyclase
activation, and based on the Trp to Ala mutation, the
integrity of the N-terminal PH domain of CRAC is required for membrane association. Numerous reports
have suggested that PH domains may associate with
either Gbg-subunits or phosphatidylinositol lipids (reviewed in Lemmon et al., 1996 and Shaw, 1996). Although chemoattractant-mediated translocation of CRAC

Polarized G Protein Signaling in Directed Cell Movement
89

to membranes depends essentially on Gb, the fact that
CRAC can associate with macropinosomes in gb- cells
suggests that Gbg itself may not be the direct CRAC
binding site. The chemoattractant-mediated generation
of the CRAC binding site could depend on a downstream
effector of Gbg. While the Gbg-sensitive PI3 kinase is an
attractive candidate, neither wortmanin nor LY294002
inhibitors of PI3 kinase altered the translocation of
CRAC-GFP to the plasma membrane (data not shown).
Consequently, at the present time, we do not know the
identity of the CRAC binding site. Additional experiments are currently under way to further address this
point.
The highly localized translocation of CRAC-GFP in
chemotaxing cells indicates that the activation of adenylyl cyclase occurs within a very defined region of the
plasma membrane at the leading edge of cells even
though the adenylyl cyclase itself is uniformly distributed
around the cell periphery (C. A. P. and P. N. D., unpublished results). The exact mechanism of action by which
this localized production of intracellular cAMP is involved in chemotaxis remains to be determined. In leukocytes, it has been suggested that cAMP is involved
in directed cell movement possibly by blocking adhesion
via its effects on PKA and RhoA (Laudanna et al., 1997).
We propose that other key components that signal directly to the cytoskeleton might also be recruited to the
stimulated edge of the cell by associating with the same
sites that recruit CRAC. By using a common binding site
at a local region of the inner face of the membrane to
initiate multiple signal transduction cascades, the cell
can coordinate its behavior in response to the dynamic
environments present in multicellular organisms.
Experimental Procedures
CRAC-GFP Fusion Protein Construct and Transformation
into crac2 Cells
A mutant GFP gene with greater brightness and slower photobleaching than the wild-type version was used (Xiao et al., 1997). The fulllength cDNA sequence of CRAC was amplified by high fidelity PCR
using primers that created an EcoRI site at the 39-end before the
STOP codon. The resulting PCR product was cloned into a unique
EcoRI site located upstream of the ATG of the GFP gene. The resulting CRAC-GFP construct was sequenced using chain terminator
chemistry (DNA Analysis Facility, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine) and finally cloned into the B18 D. discoideum expression plasmid, which gives constitutive levels of expression (Johnson et al.,
1991). This CRAC-GFP plasmid was then electroporated into crac2
cells using a Bio-Rad gene pulser, and stable transformants were
selected in 20 mg/ml G418 (Howard et al., 1988; Insall et al., 1994).
Individual clones were isolated as plaques on Klebsiella aerogenes
lawns and grown in the presence of G418 (Sussman, 1987). The
phenotypes of these clones were assessed by plating cells on nonnutrient agar at 228C, as previously described (Devreotes et al.,
1987). The cells were designated CRAC-GFP/crac2. Alternatively,
we also transfected the CRAC-GFP construct in wild-type AX2 cells.
Both cell lines behaved similarly and were used in this study.
D-CRAC and W167A-CRAC Constructs
The hemaglutinin A tag was fused to the N terminal of the CRAC
coding sequence, and the resulting DNA fragment was cloned into
the Ddp1-based D. discoideum extrachromosomal expression plasmid, p88d1 (Hughes et al., 1994). The W167A mutation was constructed using the MORPH Kit (5 Prime → 3 Prime, Boulder, CO)
with a primer encoding the mutated codon. These constructs were

then electroporated into crac2 cells as described above and grown
in the presence of 20 mg/ml G418.
Cell Growth and Differentiation
Wild-type AX3 and crac2 cells were used as controls (Insall et al.,
1994). CRAC-GFP/crac2 cells were grown in shaking suspension to
densities of z5 3 106 cells/ml in HL5 media containing 20 mg/ml
G418, harvested by centrifugation, and allowed to differentiate by
resuspending them at 2 3 107 cells/ml in DB (5 mM Na2HPO4, 5 mM
NaH2PO4 [pH 6.2], 2 mM MgSO4, 200 mM CaCl2) and shaking them
at 100 rpm for 5 hr with repeated pulses of 50 nM cAMP (Devreotes
et al., 1987; Parent and Devreotes, 1996b). After a 30 min treatment
with 2 mM caffeine (an inhibitor of adenylyl cyclase, used to bring
the cells to a basal state), cells were harvested, washed twice, and
finally resuspended at 8 3 107 cells/ml in PM (5 mM Na2HPO4, 5 mM
NaH2PO4 [pH 6.2], 2 mM MgSO4) or SLB (10 mM TrisHCl [pH 7.5],
0.2 mM EGTA, and 200 mM sucrose). The cells, designated Redi
(resting and differentiated), were then processed according to the
assay performed.
Subcellular Fractionation and Immunoblotting
Redi cells were resuspended in SLB and lysed by filtration through
5 mm-pore-size Nucleopore filters. The resulting lysates were separated into soluble and pellet fractions by centrifugation at 12,000 3
g for 30 min at 48C (Lilly and Devreotes, 1994). The pellets were
resuspended in SLB, and samples were subjected to 7.5% SDSPAGE (Laemmli, 1970). Immunoblotting was performed on nitrocellulose membranes using a polyclonal antibody directed against GFP
(Clontech Lab, Palo Alto, CA) or a polyclonal antibody directed
against the last 15 amino acids of CRAC. Detection was performed
by chemiluminescence using a donkey anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase–coupled antibody (Amersham, Arlington Heights, IL). Some
of the gels show multiple bands. Evidence suggests that these
bands result from degradation that occurs after sample preparation.
When a dilute suspension of cells was added directly to sample
buffer, nearly all the signal was in the high molecular weight band.
Quantification was performed using the NIH Image 1.59 software.
Adenylyl Cyclase Assays
Adenylyl cyclase enzymatic activity was measured in differentiated
cells as previously described (Parent and Devreotes, 1995). Briefly,
Redi cells were resuspended in PM, filter-lysed in the presence of
2 mM MgSO4, with or without the addition of 40 mM GTPgS and 1
mM cAMP, incubated on ice for 4 min, and assayed for 2 min at
room temperature. The unregulated intrinsic activity of the enzyme
was measured in the presence of 5 mM MnSO4. For receptor-mediated adenylyl cyclase activation, Redi cells were treated with 10 mM
cAMP at room temperature, lysed in the presence of 2 mM MgSO4
at specific time points, and assayed for 30 s. In the reconstitution
assays, Redi crac2 cells were lysed into tubes containing cytosol
derived from differentiated wild-type (AX3) or CRAC-GFP/crac2 cells
as previously described (Parent and Devreotes, 1995).
CRAC Translocation Assay
Redi CRAC-GFP/crac2 cells were resuspended in PM buffer, stimulated with 10 mM cAMP, and, at specific time points, filter-lysed into
1.5 ml microfuge tubes containing 1 ml ice-cold PM buffer. Samples
were centrifuged for 1 min at 15,000 3 g and the pellet solubilized
in Laemmli buffer (Laemmli, 1970). The samples were finally subjected to 7.5% SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted as described above.
Fluorescence Microscopy Analysis on Live
CRAC-GFP/crac2 Cells
Fluorescence microscopy was performed as previously described
(Xiao et al., 1997). Briefly, Redi cells expressing CRAC-GFP were
harvested by centrifugation, resuspended in phosphate buffer (5
mM Na2HPO4, 5 mM NaH2PO4 [pH 6.2]), plated in a small spot on a
chambered coverglass (Lab-Tek, Nalge Nunc, Naperville, IL), allowed to adhere, and covered with phosphate buffer to prevent
drying. The coverglasses were mounted onto a brass holder and
observed using an inverted Zeiss microscope (Axiovert 135 TV,
Thornwood, NY) equipped with 40 or 100X oil-immersion plan neofluor objective lenses, an HBO 100 watt mercury lamp, and filter

Cell
90

sets for viewing GFP (Z16, Carl Zeiss; XF100, Omega Optical Co.).
The cell movement was recorded with a cooled PXL CCD camera
(Photometrics, Tucson, AZ) controlled by IPLab-Spectrum software
(Scanalytics, Fairfax, VA) on a Power Macintosh computer. Figures
presented were obtained using 50–150 ms exposures.
Generation and Quantitation of Chemoattractant Gradients
Gradients were generated using a microinjector connected to micropipettes containing 1 to 10 mM cAMP (Femtotips, Eppendorf, Germany). To assess the gradients generated, we placed rhodamine
(MW 5 479) in the micropipette and observed the fluorescence
signal after the gradient reached steady state, under a variety of
experimental conditions. There was a radially symmetric exponential
decrease in the rhodamine concentration centered on the tip (see
below for quantitation). At the typical working distances of 10 to 50
mm, we observed 10% to 30% changes in concentration over a
distance corresponding to the length of a cell. Near Kd, similar
changes in cAMP (MW 5 329) concentration would give rise to
changes of 2% to 10% in receptor occupancy across the cell, as
illustrated in Figure 4. In the course of these experiments we also
showed that, following the application of a pressure increase on
the microinjector, the cAMP gradients were reestablished within
30 s.
Fluorescence Confocal Microscopy Analysis on Live
CRAC-GFP/crac- Cells
Cells were prepared as described above and analyzed using a confocal laser scanning microscope (Noran OZ; Noran, Middleton, WI)
with an inverted microscope (IX-50; Olympus, New Hyde Park, NY)
equipped with a U plan-apo 1003/1.35 NA oil immersion lens. An
excitation wavelength of 488 nm was used (Krypton-Argon multiline laser), and emissions of 500–550 nm were detected.
Image Processing
In IPLab-Spectrum, each series of images was optimized by histogram stretching and converted to TIFF files. For each series, a
script was written in Corel Photo Paint to crop, adjust contrast,
and sharpen. All frames of the series were processed identically.
Selected frames were built into montages in Corel Draw or PowerPoint. Quantification of fluorescence intensities for both GFP and
rhodamine was performed using the IPLab-Spectrum software.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Saskia van Es for helpful discussions and technical
assistance, Mr. Rodrigo Bustos for his assistance with the fluorescence microscopy, and Mr. Brian Kang for help with the cloning of
CRAC-GFP. We are also grateful to Dr. Denis Wirtz for providing
the Latrunculin A and Dr. Pierre A. Coulombe for helpful discussions
and excellent suggestions. Videos depicting similar experiments as
the ones presented in this paper as well as GFP-tagged chemoattractant receptors and G proteins can be viewed at www.med.jhu.
edu/devreotes. This work was supported by The American Cancer
Society Grant DB-1c to P. N. D., National Institutes of Health Grant
GM57874 to C. A. P. and P. N. D., and National Institutes of Health
Grant GM33171 to D. B. M.
Received July 8, 1998; revised August 13, 1998.

Baggiolini, M. (1998). Chemokines and leukocyte traffic. Nature 392,
565–568.
Barak, L.S., Ferguson, S.S., Zhang, J., and Caron, M.G. (1997). A
b-arrestin/green fluorescent protein biosensor for detecting G protein–coupled receptor activation. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 27497–27500.
Caterina, M.J., and Devreotes, P.N. (1991). Molecular insights into
eukaryotic chemotaxis. FASEB J. 5, 3078–3085.
Chen, M.Y., Insall, R.H., and Devreotes, P.N. (1996). Signaling
through chemoattractant receptors in Dictyostelium. Trends Genet.
12, 52–57.
Chen. M.Y., Long, Y., and Devreotes, P.N. (1997). A novel cytosolic
regulator, Pianissimo, is required for chemoattractant receptor and
G protein–mediated activation of the 12 transmembrane domain
adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium. Genes Dev. 11, 3218–3231.
Devreotes, P., Fontana, D., Klein, P., Sherring, J., and Theibert, A.
(1987). Transmembrane signaling in Dictyostelium. Methods Cell
Biol. 28, 299–331.
Devreotes, P.N., and Zigmond, S.H. (1988). Chemotaxis in eukaryotic
cells: a focus on leukocytes and Dictyostelium. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol.
4, 649–686.
Downey, G.P. (1994). Mechanisms of leukocyte motility and chemotaxis. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 6, 113–124.
Ferguson, K.M., Lemmon, M.A., Schlessinger, J., and Sigler, P.B.
(1994). Crystal structure at 2.2Å resolution of the pleckstrin homology domain from human dynamin. Cell 79, 199–209.
Ferguson, K.M., Lemmon, M.A., Schlessinger, J., and Sigler, P.B.
(1995). Structure of the high affinity complex of inositol trisphosphate with a phospholipase C pleckstrin homology domain. Cell 83,
1037–1046.
Fukui, Y., Lynch, T.J., Brzeska, H., and Korn, E.D. (1989). Myosin I is
located at the leading edges of locomoting Dictyostelium amoebae.
Nature 341, 328–331.
Gerisch, G., Albrecht, R., Heizer, C., Hodgkinson, S., and Maniak,
M. (1995). Chemoattractant-controlled accumulation of coronin at
the leading edge of Dictyostelium cells monitored using a green
fluorescent protein-coronin fusion protein. Curr. Biol. 5, 1280–1285.
Gottwald, U., Brokamp, R., Karakesisoglou, I., Schleicher, M., and
Noegel, A.A. (1996). Identification of a cyclases-associated protein
(CAP) homologue in Dictyostelium discoideum and characterization
of its interaction with actin. Mol. Biol. Cell 7, 261–272.
Howard, P.K., Ahern, K.G., and Firtel, R.A. (1988). Establishment of
a transient expression system for Dictyostelium discoideum. Nucleic
Acids Res. 16, 2613–2623.
Hughes, J.E., Kiyosawa, H., and Welker, D.L. (1994). Plasmid maintenance functions encoded on Dictyostelium discoideum nuclear
plasmid Ddp1. Mol. Cell. Biol. 14, 6117–6124.
Insall, R., Kuspa, A., Lilly, P.J., Shaulsky, G., Levin, L.R., Loomis,
W.F., and Devreotes, P.N. (1994). CRAC, a cytosolic protein containing a pleckstrin homology domain, is required for receptor and
G protein–mediated activation of adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium.
J. Cell Biol. 126, 1537–1545.
Johnson, R.L., Vaughan, R.A., Caterina, M.J., van Haastert, P.J., and
Devreotes, P.N. (1991). Overexpression of the cAMP receptor 1 in
growing Dictyostelium cells. Biochemistry 30, 6982–6986.
Jung, G., and Hammer, J.A., III (1990). Generation and characterization of Dictyostelium cells deficient in a myosin I heavy chain isoform.
J. Cell Biol. 133, 305–323.

References

Koshland, D.E. (1977). A response regulator model in a simple sensory system. Science 196, 1055–1063.

Aizawa, H., Fukui, Y., and Yahara, I. (1997). Live dynamics of Dictyostelium cofilin suggests a role in remodeling actin latticework into
bundles. J. Cell Sci. 110, 2333–2344.

Kreitmeier, M., Gerisch, G., Heizer, C., and Muller-Taubenberger, A.
(1995). A talin homologue of Dictyostelium rapidly assembles at the
leading edge of cells in response to chemoattractant. J. Cell Biol.
129, 179–188.

Alex, L.A., and Simon, M.I. (1994). Protein histidine kinases and
signal transduction in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Trends Genet.
10, 133–138.
Araki, T., Gamper, M., Early, A., Fukuzawa, M., Abe, T., Kawata, T.,
Kim, E., Firtel, R.A., and Williams, J.G. (1998). Developmentally and
spatially regulated activation of a Dictyostelium STAT protein by a
serpentine receptor. EMBO J. 17, 4018-4028.

Krump, E., Sanghera, J.S., Pelech, S.L., Furuya, W., and Grinstein,
S. (1997). Chemotactic peptide N-formyl-met-leu-phe activation of
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and MAPK-activated
protein kinase-2 in human neutrophils. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 937–944.
Laemmli, U.K. (1970). Cleavage of structural proteins during the
assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. Nature 227, 680–685.

Polarized G Protein Signaling in Directed Cell Movement
91

Lai, C.F., Ripperger, J., Morella, K.K., Jurlander, J., Hawley, T.S.,
Carson, W.E., Kordula, T., Caligiuri, M.A., Hawley, R.G., Fey, G.H.,
and Baumann, H. (1996). Receptors for interleukin (IL)-10 and IL-6type cytokines use similar signaling mechanisms for inducing transcription through IL-6 response elements. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 13968–
13975.
Laudanna, C., Campbell, J.J., and Butcher, E.C. (1997). Elevation of
intracellular cAMP inhibits RhoA activation and integrin-dependent
leukocyte adhesion induced by chemoattractants. J. Biol. Chem.
272, 24141–24144.
Lauffenburger, D.A., and Horwitz, A.F. (1996). Cell migration: a physically integrated molecular process. Cell 84, 359–369.
Lemmon, M.A., Ferguson, K.M., and Schlessinger, J. (1996). PH
domains: diverse sequences with a common fold recruit signaling
molecules to the cell surface. Cell 85, 621–624.
Lilly, P.J., and Devreotes, P.N. (1994). Identification of CRAC, a
cytosolic regulator required for guanine nucleotide stimulation of
adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 14123–14129.
Lilly, P.J., and Devreotes, P.N. (1995). Chemoattractant and GTPgSmediated stimulation of adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium requires
translocation of CRAC to membranes. J. Cell Biol. 129, 1659–1665.
Maeda, M., Aubry, L., Insall, R., Gaskins, C., Devreotes, P.N., and
Firtel, R.A. (1996). Seven helix chemoattractant receptors transiently
stimulate mitogen-activated protein kinase in Dictyostelium. Role
of heterotrimeric G proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 3351–3354.
Maniak, M., Rauchenberger, R., Albrecht, R., Murphy, J., and Gerisch, G. (1995). Coronin involved in phagocytosis: dynamics of particle-induced relocalization visualialized by green fluorescent protein
tag. Cell 83, 915–924.
Oancea, E., Teruel, M.N., Quest, A.F., and Meyer, T. (1998). Green
fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged cystein-rich domains from protein
kinase C as fluorescent indicators for diacylglycerol signaling in
living cells. J. Cell Biol. 140, 485–498.
Parent, C.A., and Devreotes, P.N. (1995). Isolation of inactive and
G protein–resistant adenylyl cyclase mutants using random mutagenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 22693–22696.
Parent, C.A., and Devreotes, P.N. (1996a). Molecular genetics of
signal transduction in Dictyostelium. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65,
411–440.
Parent, C.A., and Devreotes, P.N. (1996b). Constitutively active adenylyl cyclase mutant requires neither G proteins nor cytosolic regulators. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 18333–18336.
Peracino, B., Borleis, J., Jin, T., Westphal, M., Schwartz, J.M., Wu,
L., Bracco, E., Gerisch, G., Devreotes, P., and Bozzaro, S. (1998).
G protein b-subunit-null mutants are impaired in phagocytosis and
chemotaxis due to inappropriate regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. J. Cell Biol. 141, 1529–1537.
Shaw, G. (1996). The pleckstrin homology domain: an intriguing
multifunctional protein module. Bioessays 18, 35–46.
Sussman, M. (1987). Cultivation and synchronous morphogenesis
of Dictyostelium under controlled experimental conditions. Methods
Cell Biol. 28, 9–29.
Theibert, A., and Devreotes, P.N. (1986). Surface receptor-mediated
activation of adenylate cyclase in Dictyostelium. Regulation by guanine nucleotides in wild-type cells and aggregation deficient mutants. J. Biol. Chem. 261, 15121–15125.
Thompson, H.L., Marshall, C.J., and Saklatvala, J. (1994). Characterization of two different forms of mitogen-activated protein kinase
kinase induced in polymorphonuclear leukocytes following stimulation by N-formylmethionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine or granulocytemacrophage colony-stimulating factor. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 9486–
9492.
Venkateswarlu, K., Oatey, P.B., Tavare, J.M., and Cullen, P.J. (1998).
Insulin-dependent translocation of ARNO to the plasma membrane
of adipocytes requires phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Curr. Biol. 8,
463–466.
Westphal, M., Jungbluth, A., Heidecker, M., Muhlbauer, B., Heizer,
C., Schwartz, J.M., Marriott, G., and Gerisch, G. (1997). Microfilament dynamics during cell movement and chemotaxis monitored
using a GFP-actin fusion protein. Curr. Biol. 7, 176–183.

Xiao, Z., Zhang, N., Murphy, D.B., and Devreotes, P.N. (1997). Dynamic distribution of chemoattractant receptors in living cells during
chemotaxis and persistent stimulation. J. Cell Biol. 139, 365–374.
Zigmond, S.H. (1974). Mechanisms of sensing chemical gradients
by polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Nature 249, 450–452.
Zigmond, S.H., Levitsky, H.I., and Kreel, B.J. (1981). Cell polarity:
an examination of its behavioral expression and its consequences
for polymorphonuclear leukocyte chemotaxis. J. Cell Biol. 89,
585–592.

