Cell, Vol. 69, 305-315,

April 17. 1992, Copyright

0 1992 by Cell Press

Structurally Distinct and Stage-Specific
Adenylyl Cyclase Genes Play Different Roles
in Dictyostelium Development
Geoffrey S. Pitt,’ Nina Milona, l Jane Borleis,’
Kenneth C. Lin,’ Randall R. Reed,t
and Peter N. Devreotes”
*Department of Biological Chemistry
tHoward Hughes Medical Institute
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
Baltimore, Maryland 21205

Summary
We have isolated two adenylyl cyclase genes, designated ACA and ACG, from Dictyostelium.
The proposed structure for ACA resembles that proposed for
mammalian
adenylyl cyclases: two large hydrophilic
domains and two sets of six transmembrane
spans.
ACG has a novel structure, reminiscent
of the membrane-bound
guanylyl cyclases. An aca- mutant, created by gene disruption,
has little detectable adenylyl
cyclase activity and fails to aggregate, demonstrating
that CAMP is required for cell-cell
communication.
CAMP is not required for motility, chemotaxis, growth,
and cell division, which are unaffected.
Constitutive
expression in aca- cells of either ACA or ACG, which is
normally expressed only during germination,
restores
aggregation
and the ability to complete the developmental program. ACA expression
restores receptor
and guanine nucleotide-regulated
adenylyl cyclase
activity, while activity in cells expressing ACG is insensitive to these regulators.
Although
they lack ACA,
which has a transporter-like
structure,
the cells expressing ACG secrete CAMP constitutively.
Introduction
Cyclic AMP coordinates the early stages of the developmental program during which Dictyostelium aggregates
into a multicellular organism. Triggered by nutrient depletion, this developmental
program culminates in the formation of a fruiting body consisting of two distinct cell types
that result from differentiation of pluripotent amoebae. Durable spores rest atop a stalk of nonviable, vacuolated
cells. Extracellular CAMP, secreted by cells at maturing
aggregation
centers in an oscillatory fashion, initially
serves to organize the amoebae during aggregation (Devreotes, 1982). Surrounding cells respond both by chemotaxis and by secreting more CAMP so that they relay the
signal to cells further away. The CAMP oscillations are
necessary for gene expression as well as aggregation;
supplying constant levels of CAMP exogenously blocks
the developmental program at its outset. Adenylyl cyclase
activity and CAMP levels, low during growth, increase
when aggregation
begins (Klein, 1976). Within the resulting multicellular organism, CAMP continues to influence development. CAMP and its hydrolysis product adenosine act as morphogens
and pattern organizers to

influence differentiation of individual cells into either stalk
cells or spore cells (Devreotes, 1989; Schaap, 1986).
During aggregation, the extracellular CAMP functions
analogously to hormones and other signals whose effects
are mediated by G protein-linked
signal transduction pathways (Gilman, 1987). Stimulation of cell surface CAMP
receptors (cAR1) (Klein et al., 1988) activates a heterotrimerit G protein, whose a subunit has been designated
G,2 (Kumagai et al., 1989; Pupillo et al., 1989) to elicit the
chemotactic response and CAMP synthesis by a membrane-bound adenylyl cyclase activity. The gene products
for both cAR7 and G,2 share significant topological or sequence homology with their counterparts in mammalian G
protein-linked
pathways. Both cAR1 and G,2 are necessary to elicit the chemotactic response and for early gene
expression, as was demonstrated by targeted gene disruptionofthecAR7
andG,2genes(Kumagaietal.,
1991; Sun
and Devreotes, 1991). These Carl- and g,2- cells fail to
respond to CAMP stimuli, fail to aggregate,
and are
blocked in the developmental
program.
Two linesof evidence suggest that G,2 does not activate
adenylyl cyclase directly, however. Guanine nucleotides
stimulate adenylyl cyclase in g,2- lysates (Kesbeke et
al., 1988), suggesting that, although G,2 is necessary for
transducing the CAMP signal from cAR1 to adenylyl cyclase, a different guanine nucleotide-binding
protein directly couples to adenylyl cyclase. Recent observations
suggest that mechanisms of indirect activation of adenylyl
cyclase also occur in mammalian systems (Felder et al.,
1989; Tang and Gilman, 1991).
Other lower eukaryotes also utilize CAMP, but activate
adenylyl cyclase through a signal transduction pathway
different from the G protein motifs found in mammals and
in Dictyostelium. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, for example, RAS gene products rather than a heterotrimeric
G
protein activate adenylyl cyclase (Kataoka et al., 1985).
The ligand and receptor that activate RAS have not yet
been identified. The disparities between the activation of
adenylyl cyclase in the mammalian and yeast signal transduction pathways are reflected in differences within the
structures of the adenylyl cyclases themselves.
cDNAs for several adenylyl cyclases from higher eukaryotes recently isolated predict integral membrane proteins
of about 1100 aa that span the membrane 12 times and
contain two homologous cytoplasmic domains; one, designated C,, lies between the sixth and seventh transmembrane segments, and a second, CP, is at the carboxyl terminus. Within each of these cytoplasmic domains is a region
of homology (the C,, and CPa regions) that is also found
in the catalytic domain of S. cerevisiae adenylyl cyclase
(Krupinski et al., 1989). Outside of these domains, the
yeast and the mammalian adenylyl cyclases share little
homology; the yeast enzyme has a distinct repetitive sequence motif, no transmembrane
spans, and only the one
catalytic domain. Since adenylyl cyclase in aggregating
Dictyostelium cells has been shown to be activated by a

Cell
306

G protein (Theibert and Devreotes, 1986) that does not
appear to be a ras gene product (Reymond et al., 1986)
we predicted that the aggregation adenylyl cyclase would
more closely resemble mammalian adenylyl cyclase.
Results
Two Structurally
Diverse Adenylyl Cyclases
We designed degenerate primers based on the C2 domains (Gao and Gilman, 1991) of Type I and Type Ill adenylyl cyclases, and rutabaga, an adenylyl cyclase involved
in learning and memory in Drosophila(Bakalyar
and Reed,
1990; Krupinski et al., 1989; Levin et al., 1992) for use in
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify part of a C2
domain from a Dictyostelium adenylyl cyclase. The resulting product was used to screen genomic libraries from
which we isolated thegene. Wedesignated
thisgeneACG,
since it is expressed during germination (see below).
Analysis of the nucleotide sequence from the ACG genomic fragments predicts an open reading frame of 2574 nt
encoding an 858 aa protein, after the removal of two introns (Figure 1A). Dictyostelium introns are small, rare,
and readily identifiable by sequence because of their almost exclusive AT composition, as well as by consensus
splice sites (Kimmel and Firtel, 1982). Their size and location were confirmed by PCR analysis of mRNA (PerkinElmer Cetus, 1990). The 3’ end of the coding region is
unusually AT rich; in the last 375 nt, there are only 41 G
or C residues. Sixty of the carboxy-terminal
125 codons
are AAT, encoding asparagine, including one stretch of
14 contiguous asparagines. Asparagine-rich
sequences
appear in other Dictyostelium proteins, such as several
members of the CAMP receptor family (R. Johnson, C.
Saxe, A. Kimmel, and P. D., unpublished data), although
the functions of these repeats are not yet known. Repetitive elements contained within open reading frames are
found in other organisms, such as the opa repeat in Drosophila (Wharton et al., 1985), yet their function has also
not been identified.
The absence of ACG mRNA in aggregating cells (see
below) prompted us to renew our search for the adenylyl
cyclase involved in cell-cell signaling. We used a fragment
of ACG containing the portion that encodes its &-like domain to screen at low stringency a cDNA library made from
aggregating cells. Five overlapping clones were initially
isolated, all of which appeared to be derived from the same
mRNA as judged from sequence and cross-hybridization
analysis. Since none contained a full-length message, the
largest was used to screen both the genomic and cDNA
libraries to obtain overlapping fragments that constituted
the entire gene. This gene was labeled ACA to denote that
it is an adenylyl cyclase expressed during aggregation
(see below).
The ACA nucleotide sequence predicts a 4221 nt open
reading frame encoding a 1407 aa protein (Figure 1B).
There are three introns, as demonstrated by comparing
sequence from the cDNA and the genomic DNA isolates,
each of which has consensus splice sites and the typical
AT-rich base composition (Kimmel and Firtel, 1982). Analysis of the cDNA clones identifies three additional regions

Figure

1. Deduced

(A) Deduced amino
sequence of ACA.

Amino Acid Sequences
acid sequence

of ACG.

of ACG and ACA
(B) Deduced

amino

acid

of AT-rich sequence within the coding region. These encode for asparagine-rich
amino acid sequences similar to
the one noted in ACG.
The deduced amino acid sequence of ACA contains two
hydrophilic domains (Kyte and Doolittle, 1982) that exhibit
homology with a single domain in ACG. The aminoterminal regions of these domains are also homologous

Adenylyl
307

Cyclases

in Dictyostelium

DIVIPEPEEY
GIVYVQP.."
EDWAER..

s

..IYIQR..H
..LYYQS..Y
w Q
0.. .SPS
. .DE.PK
SIWSSPE
AQCTSAQ
DNNMGG”
8

Figure 2. Homology
Adenylyl Cyclase

Among

the C Domains

of ACA, ACG, and Type I

Alignment of the C1. and Cz. domains of ACA and Type I (bovine brain)
adenylyl cyclase and the C domain of ACG. Positions where at least
3 of the 5 aa are identical are indicated by boldface in the consensus
sequence.
The poly asparagine-rich
region in ACA-CI, has been labeled poly N. The sequences
aligned are aa 366-722 for ACA-C,, (the
poly N region is 532-609);
1144-1360
for ACA-C,,; 345-573 for ACG;
238-487
for Type I-C,,; and 806-1067
for ACA-C2.. The C,, and Cza
domains for Type I (Gao and Gilman, 1991) were extended slightly on
either side to demonstrate
additional homology.

with the domains C,, and CPa of mammalian adenylyl cyclases (Figure 2; mammalian adenylyl cyclase Type I is
shown in the figure). The amino and carboxy hydrophilic
domains in ACA have been labeled ACA-C, and ACA-C2,
respectively, to reflect the nomenclature for the mammalian adenylyl cyclase family (Gao and Gilman, 1991). The
single domain in ACG has been labeled ACG-C. Relevant
pairwise comparisons (% similarity) are 52% ACA-C,,vs.
I-C,,; 51% ACAC2a vs. I-&,; 61 O/oACA-C,,vs. ACG; 58%
ACA-C,, vs. ACG; 53% ACG vs. I-C,,; 60% ACG vs. I-&,.
One of the asparagine-rich
sequences in ACA interrupts
the &domain
in a region that is least conserved among
the C domains of all adenylyl cyclases.
The topology of the two putative adenylyl cyclases differed. Hydropathy analysis reveals that ACA contains two
hydrophobic regions, one amino terminal to ACA-C, and
the other between ACA-C, and ACA-C2. Each hydrophobic
region contains candidates for six closely spaced transmembrane spans. The predicted topology of ACA in the
membrane, therefore, resembles that predicted for the
family of mammalian adenylyl cyclases (Figure 3). In contrast, ACG has only two candidates for transmembrane
spans. A single putative transmembrane
span (denoted
as “II” in Figure 1A and Figure 3) is shown at the amino-

terminal side of the catalytic domain. A second segment
near the amino terminus likely represents a signal sequence for insertion into the endoplasmic reticulum (Pugsley, 1989).
We propose that ACG’s putative catalytic domain is in
the cytoplasm, leaving a large extracellular domain connected by the transmembrane
span to the catalytic domain. This model is reminiscent of the structure proposed
for the family of membrane-bound
guanylyl cyclases.
Members of this family of transmembrane receptors, such
as the egg peptide receptor on sea urchin sperm, the mammalian atrial natriuretic peptide receptor, and the heatstable enterotoxin receptor (Chinkers et al., 1989; Schulz
et al., 1990; Singh et al., 1988) have an intracellular domain that shares homology with the cytoplasmic domains in
the adenylyl cyclase family (Krupinski et al., 1989). ACG
is 34% identical to the atrial natriuretic peptide receptor in
this domain.
ACG Is an Adenylyl and Not a Guanylyl Cyclase
To demonstrate that the ACG gene encodes an adenylyl
cyclase, Dictyostelium cells were transformed with an expression vector in which ACG is under transcriptional control of the Dictyostelium actin 15 promoter (Cohen et al.,
1986; Dynes and Firtel, 1989). This promoter directs ACG
expression during the growth stage of the life cycle, when
endogenous adenylyl cyclase activity is very low. Lysates
of these cells (ACG cells) had a basal adenylyl cyclase
activity of 31.2 pmollmin per mg, 53-fold greater than lysates of control cells transformed with the vector only (0.6
pmol/min per mg). Adenylyl cyclase activity in ACG cells
increased in the presenceof Mn*+(Ross and Gilman, 1980)
to 307 pmollmin per mg, lo-fold over the basal activity,
while activity in control cell lysates remained the same (1.3
pmollmin per mg).
Because ACG has a similar structure to and shares
significant homology with the membrane-bound
family of
guanylyl cyclases, we also examined whether ACG is a guanylyl cyclase. ACG cell lysates had similar guanylyl cyclase
activity to wild-type control cells, 5.9 pmollmin per mg and
6.4 pmollmin per mg, respectively. Further, adenylyl cyclase activity was not inhibited by 1 mM GTP, which is
more than 3-fold higher than ACG’s Ku for ATP (data not
shown), demonstrating that ACG does not encode a guanylyl cyclase.
Stage-Specific
Expression of ACA and ACG
To determine whether ACA could encode the adenylyl cyclase that controls aggregation, we examined whether its
expression correlated with the induction of adenylyl cyclase activity during aggregation.
Northern blot analysis
demonstrates a 5.8 kb mRNA that first appears at three
hours of development and peaks at 6 hr after starvation
(Figure 4A). This time course parallels adenylyl cyclase
activity during aggregation (Klein, 1976). ACA mRNA decreases after aggregation,
and is induced again in the
later stages of development. This pattern was observed
in several independent experiments. ACA may therefore
also synthesize the CAMP that influences differentiation

Cell
308

ACA

ACG

Figure

3. Models

of ACA and ACG

The vertical bars represent
the plasma membrane;
“N” represents
the respective
amino termini; the boxed and shaded C,, C2, and C
represent the respective
C and C2 regions in ACA and the C region
in ACG.

and morphogenesis of cells within the resulting multicellular structure (Schaap, 1986).
In striking contrast, ACG mRNA is expressed as a 3.5
kb transcript only at the culmination of the developmental
program-after
fruiting bodies have formed-and
during
germination (Figure 48). Growing amoebae and cells in
the starvation-induced
developmental stage of the life cycle do not express ACG. Fruiting bodies contain about
1 O5 dormant spores that germinate when nutrients again
become available to release a single amoeba from each
spore to begin the life cycle anew. During germination, the
level of ACG mRNA increases. It peaks during the first 1.5
hr of germination and then decays, so that by 3 hr, when
germination is complete, mRNA is no longer present (data
not shown). Because ACG mRNA is absent in the amoebae that emerge from the spores at germination, any protein in these amoebae, which grow and divide indefinitely
while nutrients are plentiful, would be soon diluted to less
than one copy per cell. This implies that ACG functions
specifically during germination.

A

ACA Is the Adenylyl Cyclase That
Controls Aggregation
We examined whether ACA is the adenylyl cyclase that
coordinates aggregation by creating an aca- mutant by
gene targeting (Figure 5A). The result was unambiguous.
The aca- cells failed to aggregate and remained as a homogeneous monolayer indefinitely (>lOO hr), while the
wild-type strain began to aggregate within 3 hr of starvation
and formed fruiting bodies by 30 hr (Figures 56 and 5C).
Nine independent uracil protrophic clones were examined
by Southern blot analysis and phenotype. Eight of these
were disrupted at the ACA locus and revealed a pattern
identical to that shown for the mutant in Figure 5A. All of
these eight failed to aggregate when starved on agar
plates. Southern blot analysis of the ninth clone demonstrated that the ACA locus remained intact. This clone
aggregated and completed the developmental
program,
identical to wild-type. To further confirm these results, an
independent
aca- cell line was created in a thymidine
auxotroph (Podgorski and Deering, 1984) by disrupting
the ACA locus with the Thy7 gene as a selectable marker
(Dynes and Firtel, 1989). These cells also failed to aggregate when deprived of nutrients (data not shown). The
disruption of the ACA locus thus correlates with the inability to aggregate, suggesting that ACA is the adenylyl cyclase gene that controls aggregation.
Moreover, ACA accounts for all measurable adenylyl
cyclase activity. We assayed the aca- and parental cells
under a variety of conditions. After 5 hr of starvation, when
adenylyl cyclase activity in wild-type cells is near its peak,
lysates of ace- cells have little detectable adenylyl cyclase
activity even with the addition of Mn2+ or guanine nucleotides (Table 1). Lysates of the parental cells, in contrast,
have adenylyl cyclase activity that is stimulated by both
Mn2+ and guanine nucleotides.

Figure 4. The Developmentally
pression of ACA and ACG

ACA

Regulated

Ex-

RNA was prepared from either growing cells or
cells that had been starved on agar plates for
the times indicated.

5.6 kb -

-

l

.

3.5 kb

Adenylyl
309

Cyclases

in Dictyostelium

c
ij

A

’

Figure 5. Disruption
of the ACA Locus by
Gene Targeting Results in the Loss of the Capability to Aggregate

ij

i

,/

”

t

B

C

Oh

4h

8h

36 h

(A) Southern
blot analysis
of genomic DNA
from wild type and cells that had been transformed with a oenomic fragment
of ACA in
which an internal Clal fragment had been replaced with the Dictyostelium
UMP Synthase
gene (pACA.URA).
The stippled
box represents the ACA coding region. DNA was digested with Ndel and Hindlll. In the parental
cell line (WT), Probe A detects a ~6 kb Ndel
fragment. Gene targeting introduces
a Hindlll
site (within the UMP Synthase
gene) into the
aca mutants so that Probe A detects a 1.3
kb fragment. The filter was stripped and then
probed with Probe S to confirm that the predicted double crossover
event had occured in
the aca- cells. Probe S detects the same ~6 kb
Ndel fragment in the parental cell line, but does
not hybridize to DNA from the ace cell line,
confirming that the Clal fragment had been lost
from the genome.
(E) Developmental
phenotype
of aca- cells.
Wild-type and aca- cells were placed on starvation plates and photographs
were taken at the
time indicated.
Each photograph
shows the
middle one-third of a 100 cm2 plate.
(C) Higher magnification
showing aggregate or
individual cells at the 6 hr stage.

8h

The defect in the aca- cells appeared to be very specifc.
The growth of the am- cells in shaking culture, when nutrients are plentiful, was indistinguishable
from the parental
cells. Time-lapse video analysis revealed that motility was
qualitatively unaffected. Further, in tests of chemotaxis in
gradients of extracellular CAMP, the aca- cells performed
as did wild type (data not shown).
ACA and ACG Rescue the aca- Phenotype
Expression of ACA in aca- cells restored the ability to aggregate, further demonstrating
that the mutation was
specifc. Similar results were obtained whether we used an

ACA genomic fragment in an extrachromosomal
vector
(aca-/ACA cells) or the ACA genomic fragment cloned into
an expression vector downstream from the actin 15 promoter, which directs high levels of expression during
growth and development (aca-/ACA.ct.,5 cells) (Cohen et
al., 1966). Both of these cell lines regained the ability to
aggregate when placed on nutrient-poor agar. Within 6 hr,
cells had aggregated into mounds, and by 30 hr, fruiting
bodies were evident.
As shown in Table 1, at the 5 hr stage of development,
aca-/ACA cell lysates had similar levels of basal and unregulated (Mn2+-dependent) adenylyl cyclase activity com-

Cell
310

Table

1. Cells Overexpressing
Adenylyl

ACA Have Adenylyl
Cyclase

Activity

(pmol

Cyclase
min.’

Cell Line

MgZ+

Mn2+

GTPyS

WT
5 hr starvation

3.2

8.4

70

aca5 hr starvation

0.1

0.7

0.2

aca-IACA
5 hr starvation

3.9

7.6

54

aca-/ACA.,,.,s
growing cells

28

96

63

aca-/ACA..,.,5
5 hr starvation

80

190

290

Activity

-

mg-‘)
“I180

I

Adenylyl cyclase assays were performed
as described
(Theibert and
Devreotes,
1986) in the presence or absence of 5 mM MnSO.,. GTPyS
stimulation
was determined
in the presence
of 40 nM GTPyS and 1
@.f CAMP in the lysate.

seconds

1 tlMcAMP
Figure

pared with wild-type cells. While growing wild-type cells
have almost undetectable
adenylyl cyclase activity, the
growing aca-/ACAwlct.rs cells had high levels of basal and
Mn*+-dependent
adenylyl cyclase activity (8-fold and
12-fold higher, respectively, than aggregation-competent
wild-type cells), reflecting the high expression from the
actin 15 promoter. When these cells were starved for 5 hr,
basal and unregulated adenylyl cyclase activity increased
slightly. The GTPyS-stimulated
activity increased almost
r&fold, however, suggesting that the G protein that activates ACA is developmentally
regulated.
The capacity of the aca- cells to aggregate could be
partially restored by constitutive expression of ACG. The
aca-/ACGBcl.ls cells aggregated into small mounds (compared with wild type) within 6 hr after they were placed on
a nonnutrient agar surface. Development continued within
some of the mounds, which gave rise to small fruiting bodies. The spores in these fruiting bodies successfully germinated in rich media (data not shown). The appearance of
mounds suggests that the cells were capable of chemotaxis and likely responded to CAMP through CARI. It did
not appear that the cells produced pulsatile waves of
CAMP emanating from aggregation
centers, however,
since the territories were less than 3 mm.
To investigate whether ACA and ACG were coupled to
cAR1 , lysates of aca-/ACABcr.ls and aca-/ACGsctls cells
were assayed for adenylyl cyclase activity after a 1 mM
CAMP stimulus in vivo (Roos and Gerisch, 1976), as shown
in Figure 6. Lysates of aca-/ACA.cr.rs cells made at 30 s,
1 min, 2 min, and 5 min after the CAMP stimulus had higher
levels of adenylyl cyclase activity than untreated cells.
Adenylyl cyclase activity peaked near 2 min after CAMP
stimulation, about 5-fold higher than in untreated cells,
before beginning to decay. In wild-type cells subjected
to the same stimulus, adenylyl cyclase activity increased
about 16.fold in response to a CAMP stimulus, and the
peak was closer to 1 min. In contrast, adenylyl cyclase
activity in aca-/ACG,,t.rs cells was insensitive to CAMP
stimulation.

aca- / ACA,,s

baca-IACG

6. ACA but Not ACG Couples

to cAR1

Adenylyl cyclase assays were performed
on 5 hr StSNSd AX-~, aca-/
ACG, and aca-/ACA
cells stimulated with CAMP. Cells were removed
at the times indicated, lysed, and assayed for one minute for adenylyl
cyclase activity. The first point of every curve
represents
a sample that
was assayed before the CAMP stimulus was applied.

Because ACG was not regulated by cAR1, we examined
whether ACG was sensitive to guanine nucleotide regulation. The high adenylyl cyclase activity in ACG cell lysates
(56.7 pmollmin per mg) was not altered by GTPyS addition
(53.2 pmollmin per mg). Since GTPyS regulation may be
due to a factor that is present in aggregation-competent
cells, but not in growing cells, we examined adenylyl cyclase activity in lysates of aca-/ACG.cl.r5 cells starved for
4 hr, the time when GTPyS stimulates ACA maximally
(Theibert and Devreotes, 1986) and the time when multiple
G proteins are expressed (Wu and Devreotes, 1991).
Again, ACG was insensitive to the addition of GTPyS (15.0
pmollmin per mg basal activity; 12.6 pmollmin per mg with
GTPyS addition). This suggests that this novel form of
adenylyl cyclase may not be subject to regulation by a G
protein.
ACA Is Not Necessary for CAMP Transport
Aggregation of the aca-/ACGBct.r5 cells, presumably in response to extracellular CAMP, suggested that aca- cells
were able to secrete CAMP. We exploited the constitutive
adenylyl cyclase activity of ACG to measure CAMP secretion in aca-/ACGacr.ls cells. Cells were pre-equilibrated
with
3H-adenosine,
and extracellular
CAMP was measured
after blocking extracellular
phosphodiesterase
activity
with dithiothreitol (DTT) (Kessin et al., 1979). As shown in
Figure 7, extracellular CAMP accumulated
linearly with
time, while adenylyl cyclase activity was unchanged. Similar results were obtained when the extracellular phosphodiesterase activity was blocked with 100 uM CAMP (data
not shown). ACG, which has only a single transmembrane
span, is topologically distinct from ACA and the mammalian adenylyl cyclases. Thus, although it is possible that
ACA may be involved in CAMP secretion in wild-type cells,

Adenylyl
311

Cyclases

in Dictyostelium

Figure

2500

-10

-5

0

5

Time

10

7. aca- Cells Can Secrete

CAMP

aca-/ACG.,,.,s
cells were pre-equilibrated
with
3H-adenosine.
The supernatant
of samples
taken at the times indicated, either before or
after the addition of 10 mM DTT to inhibit extracellular phosphodiesterase,
was assayed for
3H-cAMP.

15

(min)

it is not required. The rapid secretion of CAMP from aca-/
ACG,t.r5 cells demonstrates the existence of an independent pathway for CAMP secretion.
Discussion
Stimulation or inhibition of adenylyl cyclase in response to
extracellular
signals is part of the repertoire of cellular
regulation in diverse organisms. Activation of adenylyl
cyclase and the consequent synthesis of CAMP as an intracellular second messenger results, for example, from
stimulation of f3-adrenergic receptors by P-agonists in mammalian heart cells, while inhibition of adenylyl cyclase is
mediated by a-agonists acting through a-adrenergic
receptors (Dowd et al., 1989).
Dictyostelium contains two topologically
distinct adenylyl cyclases: a twelve transmembrane-span
form (ACA),
topologically equivalent to the adenylyl cyclases identified
in higher metazoans; and a novel single transmembranespan form (ACG). The two genes are expressed at specific
developmental
stages and subject to different modes of
regulation. ACA is expressed during aggregation and is
the adenylyl cyclase activated in response to stimulation
of cAR1 , a G protein-linked
receptor. ACG is expressed
only during germination, and it is insensitive to guanine
nucleotides.
Among adenylyl cyclases studied in eukaryotic protozoa, ACA is unique in its membrane topology and its regulation by guanine nucleotides. Neither the S. cerevisiae
nor Schizosaccharomyces
pombe adenylyl cyclases (Kataoka et al., 1985; Young et al., 1989) for example, share
ACA’s topology. While S. cerevisiae adenylyl cyclase activity is regulated by a ras gene product, and S. pombe
adenylyl cyclase is insensitive to guanine nucleotide regulation, ACA is regulated by a surface receptor through a
guanine nucleotide binding protein which does not appear
to be the ras gene product. The appearance of a form of
enzyme that is similar to that in mammals in one of the
earliest multicellular organisms may signify an evolutionary branch point in the function of adenylyl cyclases and
CAMP. The accessible genetics and biochemistry of Dictyostelium may make it a convenient vehicle for the study of
mammalian adenylyl cyclases.

Our identification and studies of ACG demonstrate a
novel form of eukaryotic adenylyl cyclase. In our model
of ACG, a single transmembrane
span connects a large
extracellular domain, which may serve to bind ligands, to
the internal catalytic domain. ACG’s extracellular domain
may be involved in recognition of an extracellular signal
present during germination,
when ACG is expressed,
which leads to activation or inhibition of CAMP synthesis
by the cytoplasmic domain. This suggests that ACG has
the receptor component, signal transduction apparatus,
and catalytic component within the same molecule. This
model is analogous to the atrial natriuretic peptide receptor
in mammals and to the chemotactic egg peptide receptor
in sea urchin sperm, which are guanylyl cyclases whose
activities are regulated by binding of their respective ligands to extracellular
domain (Chinkers et al., 1989;
Schulz et al., 1990; Singh et al., 1988). It should be noted
that while there may be an evolutionary relationship, ACG
is clearly an adenylyl cyclase and not a guanylyl cyclase.
We are currently searching for a signal that activates or
inhibits ACG activity and are investigating the function of
ACG during germination in an acg- cell line created by
gene targeting. A search of the NBRF Protein Bank fails
to identify any proteins with homology to ACG’s putative
extracellular domain.
ACA and the other examples of the twelve transmembrane-span form of adenylyl cyclase represent only one
part of a multicomponent signal transduction pathway. As
part of a G protein-linked
signal transduction pathway,
these adenylyl cyclases are indirectly coupled to a transmembrane domain receptor and may be just one of several
intracellular effecters activated by the receptor. A single
receptor has been shown to interact with several G proteins, and individual G proteins may activate several effectors (Freissmuth et al., 1989). Indeed, activation of ACA
is only one of many cAMPstimulated
responses during
aggregation in Dictyostelium.
Where the entire signal transduction apparatus (receptor, transducer, and effector) is combined in one molecule,
such as in the family of membrane-bound
guanylyl cyclases and possibly ACG, the extracellular signals are
more specific in their intracellular effects, regulating the
alteration in the concentration of only one second messen-

Cell
312

ger molecule. It is conceivable that there may be tissuespecific or developmental stage-specific requirements for
the regulation of CAMP as the sole intracellular second
messenger in response to a particular stimulus in higher
eukaryotes. The presence of both forms of adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium suggests that metazoa may express
both this novel form as well as the twelve transmembrane form.
A family of genes from the Trypanosoma equiperdum
and brucei species, homologous to ACG in sequence and
structure, has recently been identified (Alexandre et al.,
1990; Ross et al., 1991). Like ACG, the members of this
family appear to have a single transmembrane span separating an extracellular domain from a cytoplasmic domain
that shares homology with the catalytic domains of the
adenylyl and guanylyl cyclase families. While expression
of a partial open reading frame from a T. equiperdum gene
in S. cerevisiae results in an increase in adenylyl cyclase
activity, it has not yet been demonstrated whether the T.
brucei genes encode adenylyl or guanylyl cyclases. The
functions of these enzymes in the Trypanosome life cycle
have not yet been identified. All of the mammalian adenylyl
cyclases for which the genes have been cloned have the
twelve transmembrane
domain structure and are regulated by G proteins, but an adenylyl cyclase activity insensitive to guanine nucleotide regulation has been identified
in mammalian sperm (Garbers and Kopf, 1980). This enzyme may be structurally homologous to ACG.
Constitutive expression of ACA allowed us to investigate
the development of its sensitivity to guanine nucleotides.
The time course of the appearance of the factor responsible for this regulation is similar to that of ACA gene expression. Since ACA is not regulated by a ras gene product
(Reymond et al., 1986), we predict that a heterotrimeric G
protein confers the guanine nucleotide sensitivity. A recently isolated a subunit gene whose pattern of developmental expression mirrors ACA expression may be this G
protein (Wu and Devreotes, 1991).
It appears that two G proteins are involved in receptormediated activation of ACA in vivo. In cell lysates, cAR1
remains coupled to G,2, but the cARl/G,2 complex is uncoupled from ACA (Theibert and Devreotes, 1986; Van
Haastert, 1984). Further, while there is no cARI-mediated
ACA activation in intact g,2- cells, ACA activity remains
fully sensitive to guanine nucleotide regulation in go2- cell
lysates.
G proteins that are not directly coupled to the activating
receptor also appear to be involved in the activation of
adenylyl cyclases in other systems. In human neutrophil
membranes, for example, activation of adenylyl cyclase
by guanine nucleotides appears to be dependent on a
different G protein than that coupled to the fMet-Leu-Phe
receptor (Verghese et al., 1985). Similarly, in A9 L cells
transfected with the ml muscarinic receptor, carbachol
activates synthesis of CAMP in intact cells but not in cell
membranes (Felder et al., 1989). Further, in cells expressing recombinant Type II adenylyl cyclase, CAMP synthesis
can be triggered via receptors coupled to G,, but activated
Ga, alone does not stimulate the enzyme.
Recent in vitro studies of several subtypes of mamma-

lian adenylyl cyclases have demonstrated
alternative
mechanisms of G protein regulation that may explain
theseobservations.
While theType lenzymecan bestimulated by activated Ga,, maximal stimulation of Type II requires Ga, and Gf3r (Tang and Gilman, 1991). Thus, in the
examples cited, receptor stimulation may result in release
of a G protein 9~ complex that interacts with Ga, to activate
adenylyl cyclase. Likewise, the requirement for two G proteins in the activation of ACA could be explained if stimulation of the cAR1 results in the release of the 9~ complex
from G,2, which then interacts with the as yet unidentified
Ga,. It is important to note, however, that ACA is no more
homologous to Type II than to Type I.
We have demonstrated that adenylyl cyclase and CAMP
are essential for Dictyostelium aggregation. We have also
shown, by disrupting the ACA locus, that ACA is not necessary for cell motility, chemotaxis, cell division, or viability.
Preliminary evidence suggests that the mutation in synag
49, a cell deficient in aggregation and without detectable
adenylyl cyclase activity (Pupillo et al., 1988), is at a locus
different from ACA; we have been able to complement the
aggregation-deficient
phenotype in aca-/synag 49 diploid
cells (Coukell et al., unpublished
data). Since the acacells lack detectable adenylyl cyclase activity, they must
be devoid of CAMP. Given the universal presence of adenylyl cyclase in eukaryotic cells, it is intriguing that acacells are unaffected in these cellular processes.
The proposed structure for ACA and the mammalian
adenylyl cyclases, two sets of six transmembrane
spans
and two homologous cytoplasmic domains, is topologitally similar to a superfamily of proteins that are involved
in the transport of small molecules across the plasma
membrane. While there is little homology among the
amino acid sequences, the family of facilitative glucose
transporters (Gould and Sell, 1990) and the MDR (multiple
drug resistance) gene products, which excrete cytotoxic
drugs (Juranka et al., 1989) are two examples in which
the topological similarities are particularly striking. Cyclic
AMP secretion is displayed by many cell types, and it has
been speculated that adenylyl cyclases may facilitate its
transport (Krupinski et al., 1989). Since the aca-/ACGact.,s
cells constitutively synthesize and secrete CAMP, however, there must be CAMP transporters that are unrelated
to the twelve transmembrane
form of adenylyl cyclases. It
is possible that ACA and the mammalian adenylyl cyclase
might be involved in transport of a different molecule.
As shown in Figure 6, ACAactivity is sensitive to external
CAMP stimuli. Adenylyl cyclase activity in wild-type and
aca-/ACA.,,.15 cell lysates increases within the first 2 min
after a CAMP stimulus and decreases to its pre-stimulus
level within 10 min. Thus, ACA is both positively and negatively regulated by extracellular CAMP. This regulation is
part of the mechanism that establishes the oscillatory
CAMP waves during aggregation.
As shown in Figure 6, adenylyl cyclase activity in aca-/
ACGact.,5 is insensitive to external CAMP stimuli, yet expression of ACG in the aca- cells is able to rescue the phenotype
partially. This suggests that supplying an endogenous
source of CAMP is sufficient to restore aggregation and development in aca- cells. Rescue of the aca- cells can there-

Adenylyl
313

Cyclases

in Dictyostelium

fore be used to establish activity of an expressed adenylyl
cyclase. Dictyostelium signal transduction utilizes components (seven transmembranespanning
receptors, G proteins, and effecters) that are homologous to their mammalian
counterparts. Since mammalian proteins have been successfully expressed in Dictyostelium (Devreotes, 1989), the
aca- cells might provide a valuable tool for the study of mammalian signal transduction.
Experimental

Procedures

Cloning of ACG and ACA
Protocolswere
performed as described,
unless otherwise noted (Sambrook et al.. 1989). PCR (Saiki et al., 1988) was perfomed on 100 ng of
genomic DNA using primers RR188 5’-CCNGTNNTNGCNGGNGT-3’
and RR170 5’-GCNACAIGTTNACNGTT-3’,
where N is A, C. G, or
T. Fifty cycles of PCR were performed
with a cycle profile of 94OC for
45 s, 37°C for 1 min, and 55OC for 3 min. A 74 bp product, which was
similar in size to a predicted 71 bp product, was excised from the gel,
eluted, and subjected
to an additional
round of PCR. This newly
amplified product was subcloned
and sequenced.
This product corresponds to the codons for aa 498-521 in the ACG sequence.
A 43-mer
oligonucleotide,
RR180,5’-GTCACCCCAAACATCGAAATGTGGCTTTGCATAACCTGAAATG
-3, corresponding
to sequence
between the
PCR primers, was then used to screen EcoRCdigested
Dictyostelium
genomic DNA cloned into bZAP (Stratagene),
which yielded a 1.7 kb
EcoRl fragment, ~122. This fragment was used to screen a Sau3Al
partially digested genomic DNA library cloned into pAT153A (gift of
A. A. Firtel, University
of California,
San Diego), from which a 4.3
kb overlapping
genomic fragment,
pGlD, was isolated. These two
genomic fragments
overlap by about 400 nt.
A PCR product corresponding
to part of the catalytic domain from
ACG was used as a probe to screen at low stringency
*50,000 clones
of a hgtli cDNA library made from aggregation
competent
Dictyostelium (Klein et al., 1988). This PCR product was generated with primers
GP2 (S-GGACTAGTTGAATGATCGGGTGAGTAAGTCATAAGT-3‘)
and
GP4 (5’~CCTACTTACCATTACTTGTATCAATAATAT-3’).
Hybridization
conditions were: 50°C in 5 x SSC, 5 x Denhardt’s solution, 0.1% SDS,
0.1 mglml sonicated
salmon sperm DNA. The filters were washed at
55OC in 2 x SSC and 0.1% SDS. Five cross-hybridizing
inserts were
isolated. One of these, ph5, was used to screen the library of EcoRIdigested genomic DNA cloned into IZAP at high stringency
(filters
were washed at 65°C in 2x SSC, 1% SDS). This yielded a 6 kb
fragment labeled pGSP2. Since pGSP2 did not contain the entire ACA
coding region, the 5’ Clal-EcoRI
fragment of pGSP2 was randomly
primed and used to screen the library from aggregation-competent
cells. Out of 50,000 phage screened,
41 positives were isolated. To
determine which of these included additional 5’ sequence,
they were
screened
by PCR using primer
ACAl
@‘-GTAAGCATCACCATCAGT-3’) and either hfud or h,, (primers designed to flank the EcoRl
cloning site in lgtll).
One isolate, labeled &-ACAl,
gave an additional 0.5 kb of 5’ sequence.
This fragment was then used to screen
the library of EcoRCdigested
genomic DNA, from which pGSP8 was
isolated. This fragment contained 2 kb of additional 5’ sequence.
Sequence from both ACG and ACA was determined on both strands
using Sequenase
(US Biochemical
Corp.). For one small stretch of
ACA, around aa 850, sequence was determined
with Taq polymerase
on an ABI sequencer.
The two introns in ACG and the three in ACA
were confirmed either by sequencing
RNA-PCR
products generated
with appropriate
primers or by sequencing
cDNA isolates. The presence of the AT-rich sequence
in the ACA and ACG coding regions
was confirmed
by sequencing
multiple RNA-PCR
products
and by
sequencing
cDNAs. A cDNA library made from RNA isolated from
germinating
cells, from which we isolated a partial cDNA for ACG, in
order to confirm its AT-rich sequence and S’end, was a gift of H. Ennis
(Roche).
Construction
ACG Cells
A full-length

of Cell Lines
construct

of ACG

was created

by inserting

a fragment

from ph22 into pG1D at the common Xbal site to create pGACG. The
large (about 2 kb) untranslated
region at the 5’ end was deleted by
cutting a Bglll-Hindlll
fragment from pGACG and inserting this into a
plasmid containing a 5’cDNA, created by RNA-PCR
at the Bglll site.
This leaves less than 100 nt of sequence 5’to the initiating ATG. This
construct
was then cloned into the Dictyostelium
expression
vector
pJK1 (J.-Y. Kim, M. Caterina, and P. D., unpublished
data), which is
a derivative of the Dictyostelium
extrachromosomal
vector pATANB43
(Dynes and Firtel, 1989) into which the actin 15 promoter and the 2H3
terminator
have been inserted. This construct
was labeled pGSP1.
The pJK1 plasmid bears the neomycin resistance gene that allows the
selection of stable transformants.
The plasmid pGSP1 or the pJK1
vector alone was electroporated
(Howard et al., 1988) into wild-type
strain, AX-~, stable transformants
selected,
and one, ACG cells or
vector control cells, was chosen for further study.
aca- Ceils
The ACA gene was disrupted
by gene targeting. A uracil auxotroph
RF1 (gift of R. A. Firtel) was transformed
(Howard et al., 1988) with a
genomic fragment of ACA, pGSP2, in which a 2.0 Clal fragment was
replaced by the UMP-synthase
gene (pACA.URA)
(Kalpaxis et al.,
1991). Uracil protrophs
were selected, and their genomic DNA was
isolated (Nellen et al., 1987) to ascertain whether the ACA gene had
been disrupted.
The DNA was digested with Ndel and Hindlll, and
Southern blot analysis was performed using randomly primed probes.
aca-IACA
Cells
A full-length genomic construct
of ACA (pGSP9) was created by ligating the pGSP8 insert into pGSP7, a derivative of pGSP2 in which 2.5
kb of 3’ untranslated
sequence was removed. pGSP9 contains about
1 kb of sequence 5’to the ACA initiating methionine codon. The ACA
fragment from pGSP9 was then inserted into the Dictyostelium
extrachromosomal
expression
vector pATANB43 (Dynes and Fittel, 1989)
and the resulting fragment was labeled pGSP10. The aca- cells were
transformed
with pGSP10, and transformants
were selected in HL-5
plus 20 uglml G418.
aca-IACAals
Cells
The ACA fragment from pGSP9 was inserted into the Dictyostelium
expression
vector ~918 (Johnson et al., 1991) in the sense orientation.
The resulting plasmid was labeled pKL2. The aca- cells were transformed with pKl.2, and transformants
were selected in HL-5 plus 20
uglml G418.
aca-lACG,,.,s
Cells
aca-/ACG.,,.,s
cells were prepared by transformation
of aca- cells with
pGSP1. The resulting cells were grown in HL-5 supplemented
with 20
mglml G418.
Adenylyl
Cyclase
Assays
Adenylyl cyclase assays were performed
as described
(Theibert and
Devreotes,
1986) in the absence
or presence
of 5 mM t&SO,
on
growing or 5 hr starved cells as indicated (Devreotes
et al.. 1987).
GTPyS stimulation was determined
in the presence of 40 uM GTP$9
and 1 uM CAMP in the lysate. Each assay was determined
in triplicate.
Experiments
were repeated at least three times with similar results,
and typical assays are shown.
To examine the effects of CAMP stimulation in vivo, adenylyl cyclase
assays were performed on growing or 5 hr starved cells stimulated with
CAMP as described (Roos and Gerisch, 1976). In brief, cellsshaken
on
ice were stimulated
with 1 uM CAMP and 10 mM DTT. Cells were
removed at the times indicated, lysed, and assayed for adenylyl cy
clase activity. The first point of every curve in Figure 6 represents
a sample that was assayed before the CAMP stimulus was applied.
Experiments
were repeated at least twice for all three cell lines, and
similar results were obtained.
Guanylyl
Cyclase
Assay
Guanylyl cyclase activity was measured
in Dictyostelium
whole cell
lysates of 1.6 x iOr’ cells and in homogenized
rat brain as described
(Schultz and Bohme, 1984) except the Dictyostelium
reactions were
performed
at 22°C (as were the Dictyostelium
adenylyl
cyclase
assays). To serve as a positive control, a 45,000 x g supernatant
from
whole rat brain homogenized
in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) was used. Each
point was assayed in triplicate. This assay was repeated twice with
similar results.

Cell
314

Northern

Blot Analysis

RNAwas prepared as described (Klein et al., 1968) from either growing
cells or cells that had been starved on agar plates for the times indicated. Five micrograms
of total RNA for each time point was size
fractionated
on a 1.2% agarose gel and then transferred
to a nitrocellulose filter. A partial cDNA isolate (~14) was randomly primed and used
as a probe for ACA. A randomly primed 1.2 kb EcoRl fragment that
encompasses
the 5’ half of the coding region was used to analyze the
expression
of ACG. A randomly primed probe for the G, subunit (P.
Lilly and P. D., unpublished
data), which is constitutively
expressed
during all stages of the life cycle, was used to determine that an equivalent amount of RNA was loaded in each lane.

Secretion

of CAMP by aca-/ACG.,sj5

Cells

Cells were labeled with (2,8,-3H)-adenine
as described
(Roos et al.,
1975) except cells were labeled at 1 mCi/ml with cells shaking at 1 x
l@cells per ml in phosphate
buffer for 1 hr. Cells were washed extensively (at least 6 times) and resuspended
at 8 x lo7 cells per ml.
Extracellular
phosphodiesterase
activity was inhibited with 10 mM
DTT, and samples were taken at the times indicated. The sample was
spun for 15 s at full speed in a microfuge
and the supernatant
was
added to a solution containing CAMP and SDS. SH-cAMP was quantitated as described (Salomon, 1979). The identity of the JH-material as
CAMP was confirmed by its comigration
with standard when chromatographed in 95% ethanol, 1 M ammonium acetate (70:30). This experiment was repeated three times, and three additional times using 100
uM CAMP instead of 10 mM DTT to inhibit extracellular
phosphodiesterase, and similar results were obtained.

We would like to thank S. Desiderio
and S. Snyder for critically reviewing this manuscript,
C. Ferris and A. Cameron for providing the
rat brain, and H. Ennis for providing RNA from germinating
amoebae.
This work was supported
by American Cancer Society grant NP-60833
to P. N. D., and by NIH grant T32GM07309
(Medical Scientist Training
Program) to G. S. P.
The costs of publication of this paper were defrayed in part by the
payment
of page charges.
This article must therefore
be hereby
marked “adverfisemenf”
in accordance
with 18 USC Section 1734
solely to indicate this fact.
December

DNA library.

Proc. Natl.

Felder, C. C., Kanterman,
R. Y., Ma, A. L., and Axelrod, J. (1989). A
transfected
ml muscarinic
acetylcholine
receptor stimulates adenylate cyclase via phosphatidylinositol
hydrolysis.
J. Biol. Chem. 264,
20356-20362.
Freissmuth,
M., Casey, P. J., and Gilman,
control diverse pathways
of transmembrane
2125-2131.

A. G. (1989). G proteins
signaling. FASEB J. 3,

Gao, B. N., and Gilman, A. G. (1991). Cloning and expression
widely distributed
(type-IV) adenylyl cyclase.
Proc. Natl. Acad.
USA 88, 10178-10182.

of a
Sci.

Garbers, D. L., and Kopf, G. S. (1980). The regulation of spermatozoa
by calcium and cyclic nucleotides.
In Advances
in Cyclic Nucleotide
Research,
P. Greengard
and A. Robinson,
eds. (New York, Raven
Press) pp. 251-306.
Gilman,
signals.

A. G. (1987). G proteins: transducers
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 56, 615-649.

of receptor-generated

Gould, G. W., and Bell, G. I. (1990). Facilitative glucose
an expanding
family. Trends Biochem. Sci. 15, 18-23.

transporters:

Howard, P. K., Ahern, K. G., and Firtel, R. A. (1988). Establishment
of a transient expression
system for Dictyosteliom
discoideum.
Nucl.
Acids Res. 16, 2613-2623.
Johnson, R. L., Vaughan, R. A., Caterina, M. J., Van Haastert, P. J. M.,
and Devreotes,
P. N. (1991). Cverexpression
of the CAMP receptor
1 in growing Dictyostefium
cells. Biochemistry
30, 6982-6986.
Juranka,
P. F., Zastawny,
R. L., and Ling, V. (1989). P-glycoprotein:
multidrug-resistance
and a superfamily
of membrane-associated
transport proteins. FASEB J. 3, 2583-2592.

Acknowledgments

Received

netic marker in Dictyostelium
using a genomic
Acad. Sci. USA 867966-7970.

31, 1991; revised

February

5, 1992.

References
Alexandre, S., Paindavoine,
P., Tebabi, P., Pays, A., Halleux, S., Steinert. M., and Pays, E. (1990). Differential
expression
of a family of
putative adenylate/guanylate
cyclase genes in Trypanosoma
brucei.
Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 43, 279-288.

Kalpaxis, D., Werner,
H., Marcotte,
E. B., Jacquet,
M., and Dingermann, T. (1991). A positive selection for Dictyostelium
mutants lacking
UMP synthase activity based on resistance
to 5.fluoro-erotic
acid. Developmental
Genetics.
7 7, 396.
Kataoka, T., Broek, D., and Wigler, M. (1985). DNA sequence
and
characterization
of the S. cerevisiae gene encoding adenylate cyclase.
Cell 43, 493-505.
Kesbeke, F., SnaarJagalska,
B. E., and Van Haastert, P. J. M. (1988).
Signal transduction
in Dictyostelium
discoideum fgdA mutants with a
defective
interaction
between surface CAMP receptors
and a GTPbinding regulatory
protein. J. Cell Biol. 707, 521-528.
Kessin, R. H., Orlow, S. J., Shapiro, R. I., andFranke,
J. (1979). Binding
of inhibitor alters kinetic and physical properties of extracellular
cyclic
AMP phosphodiesterase
EC-3.1.4.17
from Dictyostelium
discoideum.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76, 5450-5454.
Kimmel,A. R.,and Firtel, R. F. (1982).Theorganization
andexpression
of the Dictyostelium
genome. In The Development
of Dictyostelium
discoideum.
(New York, Academic
Press), pp. 234324.

Bakalyar, H. A., and Reed, R. R. (1990). Identification
of aspecialized
adenylyl cyclase that may mediate odorant detection.
Science 250,
1403-1406.

Klein, C. (1976). Adenylatecyclaseactivityin
Dictyostelium
discoideum
amoebae and its changes during differentiation.
FEBB Lett. 68, 125128.

Chinkers, M., Garbers, D. L., Chang, M. S., Lowe, D. G., Chin, H. M.,
Goeddel, D. V., and Schulz, S. (1989). A membrane form of guanylate
cyclase is an atrial natriuretic
peptide receptor. Nature 338, 78-83.

Klein, P. S., Sun, T. J., Saxe, C. L., Ill, Kimmel,
R. L., and Devreotes,
P. N. (1988). Achemoattractant
development
in Dictyostelium
discoideum.
Science

Cohen, S. M., Knecht, D., Lodish, H. F., and Loomis, W. F. (1986).
DNA sequences
required for expression
of a Dictyostelium
actin gene.
EMBO J. 53361-3366.

Krupinski, J., Coussen,
F., Bakalyar,
H.. Tang, W.J., Feinstein, P.,
Orth, K., Slaughter,
C., Reed, R., and Gilman, A. (1989). Adenylyl
cyclase amino acid sequence:
possible channel- or transporter-like
structure.
Science 244, 1558-1564.

Devreotes,
P. N. (1982). Chemotaxis.
In The Development
of Dictyostelium discoideum.
(New York: Academic
Press), pp. 117-168.
Devreotes,
P. (1989). Dictyostelium
cell-cell interactions
in development,

discoideum:
a model system
Science 245, 1054-1058.

for

Devreotes,
P., Fontana, D., Klien, P., Sherring, J., and Theibert, A.
(1987). Transmembrane
signaling in Dictyostelium.
In Dictyostelium
discoideum:
Molecular Approaches
to Cell Biology, J. A. Spudich, ed.
(Orlando:
Academic
Press), pp. 299-331.
Dowd, B. F., Lefkowitz, R. J., and Caron, M. G. (1989). Structure of the
adrenergic
and related receptors.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci.
12, 67-83.
Dynes, J., and Firtel, R. (1989). Molecular complementation
of a ge-

A. R., Johnson,
receptor controls
247, 1467-1472.

Kumagai, A., Pupillo, M., Gundersen,
R., Miake-Lye,
R., Devreotes,
P., and Firtel, R. A. (1989). Regulation and function of G, protein subunits in Dictyostelium.
Cell 57, 285-275.
Kumagai, A., Hadwiger, J. A., Pupillo, M., and Firtel, R. A. (1991).
Molecular genetic analysis of two G alpha protein subunits in Dictyostelium. J. Biol. Chem. 266, 1220-1228.
Kyte, J., and Doolittle,
hydropathic
character

R. F. (1982). A simple method for displaying
of a protein. J. Mol. Biol. 157, 105-132.

Levin, L. R., Han, P.-L., Hwang, P. M., Feinstein,
and Reed, R. R. (1992). The Drosophila learning

P. G.. Davis,
and memory

the
R. L.,
gene,

Adenylyl
315

Cyclases

rutabaga,
encodes
Cell 68, 479-469.

in Dictyostelium

a Caz+/calmodulin-responsive

adenylyl

cyclase.

Nellen, W., Datta, S., Reymond, C., Sivertsen, A., Mann, S., Crowley,
T., and Firtel, Ft. A. (1967). Molecular biology in Dicfyosfelium:
Tools
and Applications
in Dictyostelium
discoideum.
In Molecular
Approaches
to Cell Biology, J. A. Spudich.
ed. (Orlando:
Academic
Press), pp. 67-106.
Perkin-Elmer
Cetus.
Catalog. p. 19.

(1990).

Methods

for RNA-PCR

reaction.

Spring

Podgorski, G., and Deering, R. A. (1964). Thymidine-requiring
of Dictyostelium
discoideum.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 4, 2784-2791.

mutants

Pugsley,

Press).

A. (1989).

Protein

Targetting

(San Diego:

Academic

Pupillo, M., Klein, P., Vaughan, R., Pitt, G., Lilly, P., Sun, T., Devreotes,
P., Kumagai, A., and Firtel, R. (1986). CAMP receptor and G-protein
interaction control development
in Dictyostelium.
Cold Spring Harbor
Symp. Quant. Biol. 53, 657-665.
Pupillo, M., Kumagi, A., Pitt, G., Firtel, R., and Devreotes,
Multiple a subunits of guanine nucleotide
binding proteins
Helium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86, 4892-4897.

P. (1969).
in Dictyo-

Reymond,
C., Gomer, R., Nellen, W., Thiebert, A., Devreotes,
P., and
Firtel, R. A. (1986). Phenotypic
changes
induced by a mutated ras
gene during the development
of Dictyoste/ium
transformants.
Nature
323, 340-343.
Roos, W., and Gerisch,
G. (1976). Receptor-mediated
adenylate
clase activation in Dictyostelium
discoideum.
FEBS Lett. 68, 170-I

cy72.

Roos, W., Nanjundiah,
V., Malchow, D., and Gerisch, G. (1975). Amplification of cyclic-AMP
signals in aggregating
cells of Dictyostelium
discoideum.
FEBS Lett. 53, 139-142.
Ross, D. T., Raibaud, A., Florent, I. C., Sather, S., Gross, M. K., Storm,
D. R., and Eisen, H. (1991). The trypanosome
VSG expression
site
encodes
adenylate
cyclase
and a leucine-rich
putative
regulatory
gene. EMBO J. 70, 2047-2053.
Ross, E M., and Gilman,
hormone-sensitive
adenylate
564.

A. (1980).
Biochemical
properties
of
cyclase. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 49, 533-

Saiki, R. K., Gelfand, D. H., Stoffel, S., Scharf, S. J., Higuchi, A., Horn,
G. T.. Mullis, K. B., and Erlich, H. A. (1988). Primer-directed
enzymatic
amplification
of DNA with a thermostable
DNA polymerase.
Science
239, 487-491.
Salomon, Y. (1979). Adenylate cyclase assay. In Advances
in Cyclic
Nucleotide Research,
P. Greengard
and A. Robinson, eds. (New York:
Raven Press), pp. 35-55.
Sambrook,
J., Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T. (1989). Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory
Manual (Cold Spring Harbor, New York: Cold Spring
Harbor Press).
Schaap, P. (1986). Regulation of size and pattern
molds. Differentiation
33, l-16.

in the cellular

slime

Schultz, G., and Bohme, E. (1984). Guanylate cyclase.
In Methods of
Enzymatic Analysis, H. U. Bergmeyer,
ed. (Weinheim:
Verlag Chemie),
pp. 379-388.
Schulz, S., Green, C. K., Yuen,
Guanylyl cyclase is a heat-stable
948.

P. S. T., and Garbers,
enterotoxin
receptor.

D. L. (1990).
Cell 63, 941-

Singh, S., Lowe, D. G., Thorpe, D. S., Rodriguez,
H., Kuang, W. J.,
Dangott, L. J., Chinkers,
M., Goeddel, D. V., and Garbers, D. L. (1988).
Membrane
guanylate cyclase is a cell-surface
receptor with homology
to protein kinases. Nature 334, 708-712.
Sun, T. J., and Devreotes,
tion stage CAMP receptor
582.

P. N. (1991). Gene targeting of the aggregacAR7 in Dictyoste/ium.
Genes Dev. 5, 572-

Tang, W.J.,
and Gilman, A. G. (1991). Type-specific
regulation
of
adenylyl cyclase by G protein f3r subunits. Science 254, 1500-1503.
Theibert, A., and Devreotes,
P. (1986). Surface
vation of adenylate
cyclase
in Dictyostelium.
15121-15125.

receptor-mediatedactiJ. Biol. Chem. 267,

Van Haastert, P. J. M. (1984). Guanine nucleotides
modulate cell surface CAMP-binding
sites in membranes
from Dictyostelium
distideurn.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
124. 597-604.

Verghese,
M. W., Fox, K., McPhail, L. C., and Snyderman,
R. (1985).
Chemoattractantelicited
alterationsof
CAMP levels in human polymorphonuclear
leukocytes
require a Ca2’-dependent
mechanism
which is
independent
of transmembrane
activation
of adenylate
cyclase.
J.
Biol. Chem. 260, 8769-6775.
Wharton,
K. A., Yedvobnick,
Tsakonas,
S. (1985). A novel
by the Notch locus and other
melanogaster.
Cell. 40, 55-62.

B., Finnerty,
V. G., and Artavanisfamily of transcribed
repeats shared
developmentally
regulated loci in D.

Wu, L., and Devreotes,
P. N. (1991). Dicryostelium
transiently
expresses eight distinct G-protein a-subunits
during its developmental
program. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
179, 1141-1147.
Young, D., Riggs, M., Field, J., Vojtek, A., Broek. D., and Wigler,
(1989). The adenylyl cyclase gene from Schizosaccharomycespombe.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86. 7989-7993.
GenBank

Accession

The accession
ACG, M87278;

M.

Numbers

numbers for the sequences
ACA, M87279.

reported

in this paper are

