Molecular Biology of the Cell
Vol. 14, 5019 –5027, December 2003

Uniform cAMP Stimulation of Dictyostelium Cells
Induces Localized Patches of Signal Transduction and
Pseudopodia
Marten Postma,* Jeroen Roelofs,*† Joachim Goedhart,‡§
Theodorus W.J. Gadella,‡§ Antonie J.W.G. Visser,¶ and
Peter J.M. Van Haastert*储
*Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, the
Netherlands; ‡Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Department of Plant Sciences, Wageningen
University, 6703 HA Wageningen, The Netherlands; and ¶MicroSpectroscopy Centre, Laboratory of
Biochemistry, Wageningen University, The Netherlands
Submitted May 22, 2003; Revised September 23, 2003; Accepted October 9, 2003
Monitoring Editor: Paul Matsudiara

The chemoattractant cAMP induces the translocation of cytosolic PHCrac-GFP to the plasma membrane. PHCrac-GFP is a
green fluorescent protein fused to a PH domain that presumably binds to phosphatydylinositol polyphosphates in the
membrane. We determined the relative concentration of PHCrac-GFP in the cytosol and at different places along the cell
boundary. In cells stimulated homogeneously with 1 ␮M cAMP we observed two distinct phases of PHCrac-GFP
translocation. The first translocation is transient and occurs to nearly the entire boundary of the cell; the response is
maximal at 6 – 8 s after stimulation and disappears after ⬃20 s. A second translocation of PHCrac-GFP starts after ⬃30 s and
persists as long as cAMP remains present. Translocation during this second response occurs to small patches with radius
of ⬃4 –5 ␮m, each covering ⬃10% of the cell surface. Membrane patches of PHCrac-GFP are both temporally and spatially
closely associated with pseudopodia, which are extended at ⬃10 s from the area with a PHCrac-GFP patch. These signaling
patches in pseudopodia of homogeneously stimulated cells resemble the single patch of PHCrac-GFP at the leading edge
of a cell in a gradient of cAMP, suggesting that PHCrac-GFP is a spatial cue for pseudopod formation also in uniform
cAMP.

INTRODUCTION
Many biochemical and cellular processes, such as nuclear
division, lipid transport, and cytoskeletal rearrangement are
not uniformly distributed within the cell. A pronounced
example is chemotaxis; a process in which cells move toward the higher concentration in a chemical gradient. Eukaryotic cells measure the difference in chemoattractant concentration between the ends of the cell and extend a
pseudopodium up the gradient of chemoattractant. This
mechanism of chemotaxis is essentially identical in all eukaryotes. Dictyostelium is used as a model, because this
organism can be genetically manipulated like yeast, but still
resemble mammalian cells with respect to cell movement. In
Dictyostelium, cell movement is directed by a complex regulatory circuit composed of surface chemoattractant receptors that activate guanylyl cyclase and PI3-kinase producing
Article published online ahead of print. Mol. Biol. Cell 10.1091/
mbc.E03– 08 – 0566. Article and publication date are available at
www.molbiolcell.org/cgi/doi/10.1091/mbc.E03– 08 – 0566.
储
Corresponding author. E-mail address: P.J.M.van.Haastert@
chem.rug.nl.
Present addresses: † Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, 240 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115-5730; § Section of Molecular Cytology, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Kruislaan 316, 1098 SM
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

© 2003 by The American Society for Cell Biology

cGMP and phosphatydylinositol 3-phosphates, respectively.
cGMP is involved in myosin phosphorylation and assembly
(Bosgraaf et al., 2002), whereas the phosphatydylinositol
3-phosphates form localized binding sites for PH domaincontaining proteins (Funamoto et al., 2002; Iijima and Devreotes, 2002).
Receptor activation by the extracellular chemoattractant
cAMP may induce the translocation of several PH domaincontaining proteins from the cytosol to the plasma membrane, such as cytosolic regulator of adenylyl cyclase
(CRAC) and protein kinase B (PKB). In gradients of chemoattractants these PH-domain– containing proteins translocate to the leading edge of the cell (Parent et al., 1998; Meili
et al., 1999; Parent and Devreotes, 1999). In leukocytes a
similar translocation of PH-domain– containing proteins to
the leading edge was observed (Servant et al., 2000). In
homogeneously stimulated cells, Dictyostelium exhibits a
transient translocation to nearly the entire membrane (Parent and Devreotes, 1999), whereas neutrophils show a biphasic response; the first uniform and transient translocation of PHAKT-GFP to the membrane is followed by
persistent localization in smaller areas of the membrane
(Servant et al., 2000).
Chemotaxis is a complex network of multiple signaling
pathway controlling pseudopod formation. The observations on the localization of PH-domain– containing proteins
led to the proposal that PI3-kinase–mediated signaling path-

5019

M. Postma et al.

way provides the local accumulation of phosphatydylinositol 3-phosphates that control actin filament formation and
pseudopod formation at the leading edge (Servant et al.,
2000; Chung et al., 2001; Iijima et al., 2002). Inhibition of
pseudopod formation in the back of the cell is probably
provided in Dictyostelium by cGMP-mediated formation of
myosin filaments (Bosgraaf et al., 2002). Understanding the
interplay between these major signaling pathways requires
quantitative data on the localization of the enzymes and
second messengers involved. In this article we present a
refined analysis of the localization of a GFP-containing PH
domain. On addition of homogeneous cAMP stimulus we
observed a rapid uniform translocation of PHCRAC-GFP to
the membrane with a maximum at 8 s. This membrane
localization is transient and disappears ⬃20 s after stimulation, but reappears as patches of intense membrane associated fluorescence. A cell contains on average ⬃2–3 patches,
and each patch has a surface area of ⬃50 ␮m2, which is
⬃10% of the surface area of a cell. These patches are predominantly found in pseudopodia and are dynamic structures that disappear and reappear in the presence of continuous stimulation with cAMP. The kinetics of these responses
suggests that a pseudopod is extended preferentially from
the area of the membrane with a PHCRAC-GFP patch.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Strain and Culture Conditions
A cell line expressing the PH-domain of CRAC fused to eGFP (Xiao et al.,
1997; Parent et al., 1998) was made by electroporation of wild-type AX3 cells
with plasmid WF38 (a generous gift of P. Devreotes). These PHCrac-GFP–
expressing cells were selected and grown in HG5 medium with 10 – 40 ␮g/ml
neomycin in dishes to 80% confluence. Cells were washed twice with 10 mM
phosphate buffer, pH 6.5 (PB) while attached to the dish and starved in the
dish in PB at room temperature for 5– 8 h.

Fluorescence Microscopy
Starved cells were detached from the dish by repeated pipetting with PB. The
cells were then seeded onto the bottom coverslip (type 1, 24 ⫻ 60 mm) of a
homemade flow chamber (a generous gift of E. Potma; Potma et al., 2001),
resulting in a cell density of ⬃2 ⫻ 105 cells/cm2. After adherence for ⬃10 min,
the flow chamber was assembled on a Zeiss LSM510 (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen,
Germany) confocal fluorescence microscope with a Plan-Neofluor 40⫻ magnification 1.30 NA oil immersed objective. GFP fluorescence was excited using
the 488-nm laser line (AOTF at 2%). The resulting fluorescence was separated
from the excitation light with a 488-nm dichoric mirror and passed through a
bandpass filter (505–550 nm). The pinhole was set at 67 ␮m (corresponding to
approximately 1 airy unit) to obtain confocal sections.
The flow chamber has entrance and exit tubes that were filled with PB to the
same level. By addition of fluid to the entrance tube, the chamber automatically and rapidly fills with the new liquid. In previous experiments it has been
shown that exchange of solutions results in a laminar flow without occurrence
of gradients, with delay time of ⬃1 s (Potma et al., 2001). Before the start of
every experiment the chamber was rinsed with PB, and the time between
subsequent experiments was at least 3 min to let cells recover from previous
experiments.

The SD of the normalized fluorescence intensity is

␴ˆ C ⫽

(2)

Boundary Signal. With the aid of a computer, a contour of the same cell was
calculated based on the transition of the background fluorescence intensity to
the cytosolic fluorescence intensity at the periphery of the cell. This outer
contour was positioned at the value of (IC ⫺ IB)/2 and was used to determine
an inner contour at a distance of 0.5 ␮m from the outer contour. The inner
contour then approximately coincided with the boundary region where translocation was apparent. If necessary the contour was adjusted by hand and aid
of the computer. Using spline interpolation 1000 equidistant contour points
were positioned on the inner contour. At every contour point a small line
segment (0.2–1 ␮m, see below) perpendicular to the inner contour was constructed and the fluorescence intensity profile along this line segment was
determined using linear pixel interpolation. The fluorescence intensity at the
cell boundary (IM) was then extracted from the intensity profile using either
a quick or an accurate methods.
In the quick method IM is defined as the maximum fluorescence intensity
along the line segment. This method uses longer line segments (1 ␮m) and the
contour does not have to coincide precisely with the boundary region. The
disadvantage is that the value of the fluorescence intensity is overestimated
because of skewed noise entering the data. A more accurate, but timeconsuming, method requires the precise adjustment by hand of the inner
contours with the boundary of the cell. The fluorescence intensity profile
along the shorter line segment (0.225 ␮m, the size of a pixel) is determined
and IM is defined to be the average fluorescence intensity value along the
segment. The data obtained by the fast method provide a very clear picture of
the events taken place at the plasma membrane, but contain slight overestimates of the fluorescence intensity. For statistical analysis of the data we
prefer the accurate method, because it allows a quantitative comparison
between fluorescence intensity in the cytosol and at the boundary.
Given IM, we define ÎM as the normalized signal at a specific location of the
cell boundary:
ÎM ⫽

I M ⫺ IB
.
ICO ⫺ IB

(3)

Thus, the signal at the membrane after stimulation is presented relative to the
signal in the cytosol before stimulation.
For analysis and visualization of the dynamic changes of membrane localized PHCrac-GFP, the thousand values of one image are presented as grayscales or false color on a strip with an interval of 2 s. To facilitate visual
interpretation of these plots, the fluorescence intensity of the strips were
connected yielding a two-dimensional fluorescence spatiotemporal fluorescence intensity plot. The color codes represent the difference between the
normalized boundary fluorescence and the normalized cytosolic fluorescence:
ÎM ⫺ ÎC.

Fraction of Membrane with Significant Translocation
Translocation of fluorescence is apparent when the fluorescence intensity at
the boundary ÎM is significantly different compared with the average fluorescence intensity in the cytosol ÎC. A Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to
determine the boundary points with significant translocation. The average
boundary intensity 具ÎM典 was calculated for every boundary point and a
number of adjacent boundary points. The number of adjacent boundary
points was chosen such that it spanned a length of three original confocal
image pixels. A boundary point has significant translocation if 具ÎM典3 ⬎ ÎC ⫹ ␴ˆ C
. The Fraction of Translocation (FoT) is defined as the fraction of boundary
points that show significant translocation.
The probability that the average of three adjacent pixels in an unstimulated
cell have the required intensity is
1 ⫺ erf共 冑3兲 ⫽ 0.016

Data Analysis
A series of confocal images of 115 ⫻ 115 ␮m (512 ⫻ 512 pixels) were recorded
(zoom 2.0) and saved as 12-bit grayscale bitmaps. The images were processed
in Matlab 5.3 in the following way.
Cytosolic Signal. A cytosolic region of interest was selected from a particular
cell with the aid of a computer; nuclei and visible cytosolic organelles were
omitted. The mean fluorescence intensity IC and SD ␴ˆ C of the pixel values in
this region were determined for each image in the series. The cytosolic
fluorescence intensity IC0 of an unstimulated cell was defined as the average
value of IC in five images just before cAMP stimulation of the cells. From these
five images also the background fluorescence intensity outside the cells IB was
determined. We define the normalized cytosolic signal ÎC as follows:
IC ⫺ IB
ÎC ⫽
.
ICO ⫺ IB

5020

␴C
.
ICO ⫺ IB

(1)

this gives a background noise of only 1.6%.

Protrusions and Pseudopodia
The outline of the cell was compared for two subsequent images. The new
area of the cell is defined as protrusion if it is a small extension (⬍1 ␮m); often
multiple thin protrusions are formed from a small area of the cell. The new
area of the cell is defined as a pseudopodium if it is larger extension (⬎1 ␮m);
generally one broader pseudopod is formed from a small area of the cell.

RESULTS
Spatial Variation in Fluorescence in Response to cAMP
Figure 1 shows a series of confocal fluorescence images of a
single cell recorded during 8 s before and 60 s after uniform

Molecular Biology of the Cell

Signalling Patches by Uniform cAMP

from the same experiment. The fluorescence intensity before
stimulation does not decrease significantly (⬍1% per 10 s);
therefore, bleaching of eGFP does not contribute significantly to changes in the observed fluorescence levels. A
decrease of fluorescence intensity is first observed between 2
and 4 s after addition of cAMP to the perfusion chamber,
which has a lag-time of ⬃1 s. The average intensity decreases to a minimum of 0.48 ⫾ 0.08 at 8 s after stimulation
with 1 ␮M cAMP. This decrease of fluorescence intensity is
transient; the fluorescence approaches prestimulus levels
(0.95 ⫾ 0.07) at ⬃25 s after stimulation. Subsequently a
second phase of depletion of cytosolic fluorescence intensity
takes place, which starts at ⬃30 s after stimulation and
reaches a minimal fluorescence intensity of 0.63 ⫾ 0.07. The
depletion of PHCrac-GFP from the cytosol remains present at
this level during the subsequent stimulation with 1 ␮M
cAMP.

Figure 1. cAMP-mediated translocation of PHCrac-GFP. Aggregation competent cells were stimulated in a perfusion chamber with a
homogeneous cAMP concentration of 1 ␮M at t ⫽ 0 s. Confocal
images were taken at the times indicated. The figure shows GFP in
the cytosol before cAMP stimulation, a transient translocation of
GFP to the entire boundary of the cell at 8 s after addition of cAMP,
and patches of GFP at the boundary after 40 s.

stimulation with 1 ␮M cAMP. Before stimulation PHCracGFP is localized mainly in the cytosol. An increase of fluorescence at the boundary of the cell is apparent at 8 s after
addition of cAMP. The strong fluorescence at the boundary
has disappeared at 24 s. A second response at the boundary
appears after 40 s. The enhanced fluorescence at the boundary now seems to be localized in separate regions and not
along the entire boundary as during the first response.
To quantify the fluorescence in the cytosol and at the
boundary, generally a line is drawn through the cell. Statistical analysis of the fluorescence intensity along this line in
many cells provides information on the relative concentration of PHCrac-GFP in the cytosol and at the boundary of the
cell (Parent et al., 1998). This method is simple but uses only
a very small portion of the pixels of the cells inner area.
More importantly, the method is not very suitable for analysis of the fluorescence along the boundary of the cell,
especially during the second patch-like response. We developed semiautomatic methods to quantify the fluorescence
intensity in the cytosol and along the entire cell boundary.
Analysis of Fluorescent Intensity in the Cytosol
To estimate the fluorescent intensity of the cytosol, a region
of interest was selected in a confocal image (Figure 2, A and
B). This region of interest is as large as possible, but omits
the strongly fluorescent nucleus and vesicles as well as big
nonfluorescent vacuoles. Dictyostelium cells show heterogeneous levels of PHCrac-GFP expression. Therefore, the fluorescence intensity of the cytosol after stimulation with cAMP
is presented relative to the fluorescence intensity of the same
cell before stimulation. The normalized fluorescent intensity
in the cytosol after stimulation with 1 ␮M cAMP is presented in Figure 2C as the average value of 20 different cells

Vol. 14, December 2003

Analysis of Fluorescent Intensity at the Plasma
Membrane
In fluorescent images of PHCrac-GFP–labeled cells, the
plasma membrane is not formally identified. We will determine the fluorescent intensity along the boundary of the cell,
which will include the plasma membrane and membraneassociated proteins, but may represent the cytosol if no
membrane-associated GFP is present.
After determination of the fluorescence intensity in the
cytosol of a specific cell, an outer contour of the cell was
calculated using the transition of background fluorescence
intensity outside the cell to the cytosolic fluorescence intensity inside the cell (see MATERIALS AND METHODS).
Then, an inner contour at a distance of 0.5 ␮m from the outer
contour was calculated, which will be close to the boundary
of the cell (Figure 2D). Perpendicular to and evenly distributed along the inner contour thousand lines were positioned
(inset in Figure 2D), and the fluorescence intensity along
each line segment was determined (Figure 2E). Using interpolation (see MATERIALS AND METHODS), the fluorescence intensity at the boundary was calculated and was
normalized to the fluorescence intensity in the cytosol of the
same cell before cAMP stimulation. Figure 2F shows the
normalized fluorescence at the boundary of the cell at 8 s
after stimulation with cAMP. The thin gray line represents
the raw data and the thick black line is the result of smoothing the data by averaging over a length of three adjacent
pixels.
For analysis and visualization of the dynamic changes of
membrane localized PHCrac-GFP, the thousand values for
the fluorescence intensity of one image are presented as false
color, and the data for subsequent images are placed after
each other yielding a two-dimensional spatiotemporal fluorescence intensity plot. Figure 3B presents the normalized
fluorescence intensity at the boundary of a cell stimulated
with 1 ␮M cAMP. Before stimulation the fluorescence at the
boundary is essentially identical to the fluorescence in the
cytosol. The images taken up to 4 s after cAMP addition are
not significantly different from the images taken before stimulation. A strong and significant increase of fluorescence is
apparent in the images taken between 4 and 18 s after cAMP
addition. Translocation of PHCrac-GFP to the boundary appears to be nearly ubiquitous along the boundary; only
small parts of the boundary do not show increased levels of
fluorescence. The average fluorescence intensity at the
boundary of seven cells is 1.4 ⫾ 0.1 relative to the fluorescence intensity of the cytosol before stimulation. Between 20
and 35 s after cAMP, addition fluorescence intensity at the

5021

M. Postma et al.

Figure 2. Quantification of fluorescence intensity in the cytosol and along the cell boundary. A representative cell before and 8 s after
stimulation with 1 ␮M cAMP is shown in panels A and B, respectively. An area of the cytosol was selected that is devoid of the nucleus and
large vesicles. The mean fluorescence intensity in the selected area was determined and is presented in C as relative fluorescence at different
times after stimulation with cAMP. The results shown are the means and SD (large bars) or SE of the mean (small bars) of 20 cells. (D) The
boundary contour of the cAMP-stimulated cell. On this contour thousand short perpendicular lines were positioned (inset in D); the
fluorescence intensity along one line segment is presented in E. The fluorescence intensity along the membrane was determined for the 1000
boundary points as described in MATERIALS AND METHODS and is presented in F. The thin gray line represent the original data, which
are smoothed by adjacent averaging in the black line. ÎC ⫹ ␴ˆ C refers to the fluorescence intensity of the cytosol ÎC and the SD ␴ˆ C .The 0-position
and direction are indicated by the arrow in D.

boundary has returned to nearly the same intensity levels as
before stimulation. At ⬃35 s after stimulation strong fluorescence intensity at the periphery reappears, but translocation is far from uniform. The regions with increased fluorescence intensity appear as localized patches, separated by
voids or regions with low levels of fluorescence. Three
patches are visible in the cell presented in Figure 3. The
increased fluorescence at the boundary after prolonged
cAMP stimulation remains present in patches for the subsequent period of the experiment. The mean fluorescence intensity in the cytosol and along the boundary of this cell is
presented in Figure 3C, demonstrating that the changes in
the cytosol are associated with opposite changes at the
boundary of the cell.
Statistical Analysis of the Fraction of Translocation in
the Membrane
To compare the translocation events in the membrane of
many cells, we have determined the fraction of the boundary
that exhibits translocation of PHCrac-GFP. The FoT is defined
as the fraction of boundary points that have a fluorescence
intensity that is significantly higher than the fluorescence
intensity in the cytosol (i.e., ÎM ⬎ ÎC ⫹ ␴ˆ C; see Figure 2F and
MATERIALS AND METHODS). At 8 s after addition of 1
␮M cAMP, the fraction of translocation is high (FoT ⫽ 91.4 ⫾

5022

6.4%). At 58 s after stimulation the fraction of translocation
is much lower (FoT ⫽ 56.2 ⫾ 7.3%), demonstrating that
PHCrac-GFP translocates to only about half of the boundary.
Importantly, both FoT values have a relatively narrow distribution as indicated by the small SDs, and consequently
the two populations show no overlap (Figure 4). This suggests that the uniform first response is very different from
the second more patchy response.
Properties of Signaling Patches
Inspection of more than 20 cells from different experiments
revealed that patches are dynamic structures that disappear
and reappear at other places during cAMP stimulation. The
fluorescence intensity at the edge of most patches increases
steeply, from 10 to 90% of the maximal intensity over a
distance of only 1.0 ␮m. The distance between patches appears to be very variable; we observed cases where patches
are very close together (3 ␮m) or very far apart (20 ␮m) and
all distances between those values. The number of patches
per cell is variable from 0 to 4 patches with an average of
2.3 ⫾ 1.1 patches/cell, and their size is 9.0 ⫾ 3.2 ␮m at t ⫽
58 s after stimulation with 1 ␮M cAMP.
Many patches start their formation at a specific boundary
point and then spread out to their full size. Analysis of 23
patches from 7 cells demonstrates that the half-time of patch

Molecular Biology of the Cell

Signalling Patches by Uniform cAMP

Figure 3. Fluorescence intensity in the cytosol and at the at the cell boundary. (A) Cell
at different times after stimulation with 1 ␮M
cAMP. (B) PHCrac-GFP at the boundary, presented as the difference of fluorescence intensity between the boundary and the cytosol,
color-coded as shown below panel A. The
ordinate refers to the position along the cell
with the 0-position and direction indicated by
the arrow in the cell image. (C) Fluorescence
intensity in the cytosol of this cell and along
its entire boundary obtained from seven cells.
The data show two phases of depletion in the
cytosol that coincide with increases of fluorescence at the boundary.

formation is ⬃8 –10 s from start to full intensity. Because the
average size of a patch is ⬃10 ␮m, this implies that the initial
growth rate of patches is ⬃0.5 ␮m/s. The average lifetime of
patches was estimated from these 23 recordings during 90 s
and appeared to be variable. No patches were observed that
have a lifetime shorter than 20 s. About 55% of the patches
have a lifetime between 20 and 60 s, and ⬃45% of the
patches that appeared at some moment during the 90 s of
cAMP stimulation were still present at the end of the recordings, indicating a lifetime longer than 45 s. The average
patch lifetime was estimated to be 53 ⫾ 16 s.
Figure 5 reveals a three-dimensional reconstruction of a
Dictyostelium cell in 1 ␮M cAMP. Cells in the perfusion
chamber are relatively flat with a radius of ⬃6 ␮m and a
height of ⬃5 ␮m. One nearly round patch is visible with
radius of ⬃4 ␮m and an estimated surface area of ⬃50 ␮m2.
Patches Are Found in Pseudopodia.
Figures 1 and 3 show that PHCrac-GFP patches are often
observed at the periphery of pseudopodia. We have analyzed in more detail the localization of the patches relative to
the position of pseudopodia. After ⬃1 min of stimulation
with 1 ␮M cAMP, virtually all pseudopodia contain a patch
of PHCrac-GFP (28 of 29 pseudopodia in 15 cells), but not all
patches were found in pseudopodia (11 of 39 patches); at the
position of 8 of these 11 patches a pseudopod was formed
within the next 15 s, whereas only 3 patches remained
unassociated to a pseudopod.
To investigate whether patches are formed in existing
pseudopodia or vice versa, that pseudopodia will form at

Vol. 14, December 2003

the position of patches, we followed the life cycles of patches
and pseudopodia. This was done for the first patches that
appear after stimulation with cAMP as well as for patches
that appear at longer times after stimulation. Cells stimulated with 1 ␮M cAMP stop locomotion, retract pseudopodia (cringe), and then resume to extend pseudopodia (Varnum and Soll, 1984). Only 2 of 15 patches that appeared after
the cringe started in a protrusion, whereas nearly all patches
were formed at a convex area of the cell (Figure 6, part I).
These 13 patches grew in the subsequent 10 s to a full-size
patch. At the same time small protrusions/ruffles were
formed at the position of the patches. About 12–16 s after the
onset of patch formation, large protrusions appeared and
the patches temporarily became less confined (Figure 6, part
II); these protrusions converted to extended pseudopodia
with a defined patch of PHCrac-GFP at the periphery. We
followed 15 pseudopodia with patches toward the end of
their life cycle (Figure 6, part III). About 40 – 60 s after the
onset of patch formation patches reduce in size over a period
of ⬃6 – 8 s and disappear. Then two events were observed: In
⬃60% of the cases the old pseudopod was actively retracted
at 7 ⫾ 2 s after the patch disappeared. In the other 40% of the
cases the main cell body had translocated into the old pseudopod. Patches that are formed at longer times after stimulation with cAMP show a similar behavior as the first
patches after stimulation with 1 ␮M cAMP: the patch starts
at a specific point and shows growth in 10 s, and subsequently a pseudopodium is formed.
In the absence of cAMP stimulation, cells are actively
forming and retracting pseudopodia, but patches of PHCrac-

5023

M. Postma et al.

Figure 4. Fraction of boundary with significant translocation
(FoT). The FoT value is defined as the fraction of the boundary that
shows a significantly higher fluorescence intensity than in the cytosol. The FoT values were determined for 7 cells at 8 and 58 s after
stimulation. The FoT value at 8 s after stimulation is very high,
indicating PHCrac-GFP associates to nearly the entire boundary,
whereas at 58 s after stimulation PHCrac-GFP is found at only ⬃50%
of the boundary in patches.

GFP are not present (see Figure 1). In addition, after washing
away cAMP, patches rapidly disappear and PHCrac-GFP
returns to the cytosol, while pseudopodia are still being
formed (unpublished results). These observation reveal that
cAMP is essential for PHCrac-GFP patch formation and that
pseudopodia can be formed in the absence of PHCrac-GFP
patches. On the other hand, when PHCrac-GFP patches are
formed, they are often seen at a place where a pseudopodium is formed after a few seconds.
Patches during Local Stimulation in a cAMP Gradient
The previous results demonstrate that a homogeneous
cAMP stimulus induces patches of binding sites in the mem-

Figure 5. Three-dimensional reconstruction of patches. Cells expressing PHCrac-GFP were stimulated with 1 ␮M cAMP for 2–3 min.
From a series of confocal Z-scans, the fluorescence intensity at the
cell boundary was determined. The figure reveals one patch with a
diameter of ⬃8 ␮m.

5024

Figure 6. Correlation between PHCrac-GFP patches and pseudopodia. The life cycles of two patches are presented that appear ⬃35 s
after stimulation with 1 ␮M cAMP. Phase I, onset of patch formation. The first appearance of increased levels of PHCrac-GFP at the
boundary is indicated by the arrow at t ⫽ 0 s; the patch grows
during the next 10 s. Phase II, protrusions and pseudopod extension
occurs at the location of the PHCrac-GFP patch (arrow; the asterisk at
24 s indicates the start of a new patch). Phase II termination of the
patch and retraction of the pseudopod. At about 60 s the patch
reduces in size and disappears, and the pseudopod is retracted
(double arrow).

brane for PHCrac-GFP, which are associated with the enhanced extension of pseudopodia. Patches with these properties might be helpful in sensing and responding to spatial
chemotactic gradients. Figure 7 shows the fluorescence intensity of PHCrac-GFP at the boundary of cells stimulated
with cAMP from a pipette, which provides a strong spatial
gradient of cAMP (data derived from Parent et al., 1998).
Initially, cAMP induces a rapid and rather uniform translocation of PHCrac-GFP to the entire boundary of the cell. This
response is transient: PHCrac-GFP reappears in the cytosol,
which is followed by a new phase of translocation to the
boundary. This translocation is not uniform, but has the
appearance of a single patch with a diameter of ⬃6 ␮m. The
patch is always located at the side of the cell closest to the

Molecular Biology of the Cell

Signalling Patches by Uniform cAMP

Figure 7. Fluorescent intensity at the boundary of a locally stimulated cell. Data obtained
from Parent et al. (1998). Cells were stimulated with a pipette filled with 1 ␮M cAMP.
(A) The fluorescence intensity of a typical cell
(the position of the pipette is indicated; note
that this is not a confocal image). The fluorescence intensity at the boundary is presented
for this cell in B; the position of the pipette is
at 0 ␮m. The results show a nearly uniform
response at t ⫽ 0 s, followed by a patch of ⬃6
␮m that is formed in the direction of the
pipette and is present from 28 to 104 s. A new
patch is formed around 108 s, not at the position of the old patch but immediately to the
right side. These patches of PHCrac-GFP are
associated with the formation of pseudopodia
at those positions.

pipette with cAMP and is associated with formation of a
pseudopodium. The patch in Figure 7 remains present for
⬃75 s and disappears and a new patch is formed. Also this
new patch of PHCrac-GFP is associated with the formation of
a pseudopod.
DISCUSSION
On stimulation of Dictyostelium cells in a perfusion chamber with a uniform cAMP concentration, we observed a
rapid, transient translocation of PHCrac-GFP to nearly the
entire plasma membrane, as was observed previously
(Parent et al., 1998). This response was followed by a
second translocation of cytosolic PHCrac-GFP that did not
occur to the entire plasma membrane; instead, distinct
patches of intense fluorescence were formed at the plasma
membrane. This second patchy response to uniform
cAMP has not been reported previously in Dictyostelium,
so we were concerned about possible artifacts. Patches
appear ⬃30 – 40 s after stimulation with cAMP, which is
approximately the time of cAMP-induced cAMP secretion. Inhibition of this cAMP relay with 2 mM caffeine
(Theibert and Devreotes, 1983) did not affect the cAMPinduced patch formation (our unpublished results). The
notion that patches are observed as long as cAMP is
present, whereas the relay response is transient, also in-

dicates that cAMP synthesis and secretion is not related to
patch formation. The changes of the fluorescence intensity
at the boundary closely mirror the changes seen in the
cytosol (Figure 3C). Thus, patches are not the result of
local folds or wrinkles in the membrane. We conclude that
patches are not artifacts, but the result of PHCrac-GFP
translocation to restricted areas of the plasma membrane.
Aditionally, Dictyostelium cells do not need a spatial
cAMP gradient to respond in a localized manner. Neutrophils show a similar biphasic response to a temporal
increment of the stimulus concentration (Servant et al.,
2000). The first uniform and transient translocation of
PHAKT-GFP to the membrane is followed by persistent
polarization of the cell in a random direction; this polarization is associated with the local accumulation of
PHAKT-GFP at the leading side of the cell (Servant et al.,
2000). As in neutrophils, these patches of PHCrac-GFP
were often found in pseudopodia. In contrast to neutrophils, uniformly stimulated Dictyostelium cells do not polarize in one direction, because we observed multiple
patches of PHCrac-GFP and pseudopodia in a single cell.
To understand the biological relevance of this second
patchy PHCrac-GFP translocation response to uniform
cAMP stimulation, we have compared its properties with
the PHCrac-GFP translocation to the leading edge induced
by a gradient of cAMP (Table 1). The PHCrac-GFP patches

Table 1. Properties of PHCrac-GFP at leading edge of cells in a cAMP gradient and of PHCrac-GFP in patches of cells in uniform cAMP
Property
Size (␮m)
Lifetime(s)
Number/cell
Time between PHCrac-GFP and pseudopod extension(s)
Half-maximal inhibition by LY294002 (␮M)

PHCrac-GFP at leading edge
in cAMP gradienta

PHCrac-GFP at patch in
uniform cAMP

7.1 ⫾ 1.4
51 ⫾ 6
1
5–15
⬃20b

9.0 ⫾ 3.2
53 ⫾ 16
2.3 ⫾ 1.1
12–16
⬃15

Data shown are the means and SD deviations of at least six determinations.
a
Data were obtained by analyzing movies from Parent et al. (1998) as in Figure 7.
b
Inhibition by LY294002 was derived from Funamoto et al. (2001).

Vol. 14, December 2003

5025

M. Postma et al.

induced by uniform cAMP have a size of ⬃9 ␮m, which is
essentially identical to the size PHCrac-GFP at the leading
edge in a cAMP gradient. Also the lifetime of a PHCracGFP patch in uniform cAMP is approximately the same as
the lifetime of PHCrac-GFP in a pseudopodium at the
leading edge in a cAMP gradient, ⬃1 min. The cAMPinduced PHCrac-GFP in patches and at the leading edge
show the same sensitivity to the PI3K inhibitor LY294002
(Funamoto et al., 2001; our unpublished results). Finally,
cells extend a pseudopod at the location of a PHCrac-GFP
patch ⬃5–15 s after this patch was formed, either at the
leading edge of a cell in a cAMP gradient or at the patches
of a cell in uniform cAMP. The only difference is the
number of patches, which is only one patch at the leading
edge in a cAMP gradient and between two and four
patches in uniform cAMP. We conclude that PHCrac-GFP
patches in uniformly stimulated cells have the same properties as the single PHCrac-GFP patch at the leading edge
in a cAMP gradient.
A strong spatial and temporal correlation was demonstrated between the life cycle of patches and the life cycle
of pseudopodia in uniformly stimulated cells (Figure 6),
such that patches arise and disappear ⬃10 s before pseudopodia. A causal link between PHCrac-GFP localization
and pseudopod formation has also been obtained from
mutant analysis. In cAMP-stimulated pten-null cells, the
magnitude and time course of PI(3,4,5)P3 production are
increased compared with wild-type cells (Huang et al.,
2003). The absence of 3-phosphatase activity leads to
broadening of PHCrac-GFP localization as well as to
broadening of the region from which F-actin–filled pseudopodia are extended (Iijima and Devreotes, 2002). Thus,
pseudopodia are more likely to be formed at regions of
the plasma membrane that contain elevated levels of
PI(3,4,5)P3 and PHCrac-GFP. This strongly suggests that
PI(3,4,5)P3/PHCrac-GFP patches are a spatial cue for pseudopod formation. In uniform cAMP multiple PI(3,4,5)P3/
PHCrac-GFP patches and pseudopodia are formed,
whereas in a cAMP gradient only one PI(3,4,5)P3/PHCracGFP patch is present at the leading edge.
In uniform cAMP, the translocation of PHCrac-GFP to
patches is a dynamic process. Patches have an average
lifetime of ⬃1 min, and new patches are formed as long as
cAMP remains present. The continued formation of
patches in the presence of cAMP implies that the second
translocation response does not exhibit perfect adaptation. The absence of adaptation is also demonstrated by
experiments in which several minutes of cAMP stimulation are interrupted in the perfusion chamber by a brief
30-s period with buffer. During 30 s of buffer all patches
disappear, to reappear within 10 s after readdition of
cAMP (our unpublished results). The absence of perfect
adaptation is unexpected, because nearly all responses of
Dictyostelium cells to constant cAMP stimulation are transient and exhibit perfect adaptation (e.g., see Devreotes
and Steck, 1979; Van Haastert and Van der Heijden, 1983).
It has been demonstrated that cAMP induces the dissociation and activation of the G protein G␣2␤␥ in vivo,
which remains dissociated as long as cAMP is present
(Janetopoulos et al., 2001). Activation of PI3K is mediated
by G␣2␤␥, and this transduction pathway (including receptor and G␣2␤␥) apparently does not exhibit perfect
adaptation. Thus, cells are able to constantly monitor the
extracellular cAMP concentration, not only in a cAMP
gradient, but also at constant cAMP concentrations.

5026

The continuous formation of multiple PHCrac-GFP
patches in Dictyostelium cells in constant cAMP not only
reveals the absence of perfect adaptation, but also indicates that one patch does not become dominant over other
patches, and consequently cells are not polarized in one
direction. Neutrophils, in contrast, become persistently
polarized in a random direction upon uniform stimulation, and show a single patch of PHAKT-GFP at the leading
edge (Servant et al., 2000). The absence of adaptation of
PHCrac-GFP translocation and the low tendency of Dictyostelium cells to become polarized in uniform cAMP is
reflected by the chemotactic behavior of 5-h starved Dictyostelium cells in gradients of cAMP. Reversal of the
gradient often leads to the formation of a new front at the
old back of the Dictyostelium cell, whereas neutrophils
usually make a U-turn at the existing front (Zigmond et
al., 1981; Swanson and Taylor, 1982). Interestingly, inhibition of PI3K in 5-h starved Dictyostelium cells with
LY294002 suppresses the extension of pseudopodia at the
old back, and cells now change direction by making a
U-turn (Chen et al., 2003).
In summary, we have demonstrated that uniform cAMP
induces patches of PI(3,4,5)P3/PHCrac-GFP that are likely
to be the spatial cues to form pseudopodia. The absence of
perfect adaptation of this response is unexpected, but
explains why Dictyostelium cells readily reverse direction
when the cAMP gradient reverses.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Peter Devreotes for providing plasmid WF38 and Eric Potma for the
flow chamber. This research was supported by the Netherlands Organization
for Scientific Research (NWO).

REFERENCES
Bosgraaf, L., Russcher, H., Smith, J.L., Wessels, D., Soll, D.R., and Van Haastert, P.J.M. (2002). A novel cGMP signalling pathway mediating myosin
phosphorylation and chemotaxis in Dictyostelium. EMBO J. 21, 4560 – 4570.
Chen, L., Janetopoulos, C., Huang, Y.E., Iijima, M., Borleis, J., and Devreotes, P.N. (2003). Two phases of actin polymerization display different
dependencies on PI(3,4,5)P3 accumulation and have unique roles during
chemotaxis. Mol. Biol. Cell 14, 000 – 000.
Chung, C.Y., Funamoto, S., and Firtel, R.A. (2001). Signaling pathways
controlling cell polarity and chemotaxis. Trends Biochem. Sci. 26, 557–566.
Devreotes, P.N., and Steck, T.L. (1979). Cyclic 3⬘, 5⬘ AMP relay in Dictyostelium discoideum. II. Requirements for the initiation and termination of
the response. J. Cell Biol. 80, 300 –309.
Funamoto, S., Meili, R., Lee, S., Parry, L., and Firtel, R.A. (2002). Spatial
and temporal regulation of 3-phosphoinositides by PI 3-kinase and PTEN
mediates chemotaxis. Cell 109, 611– 623.
Funamoto, S., Milan, K., Meili, R., and Firtel, R.A. (2001). Role of phosphatidylinositol 3⬘ kinase and a downstream pleckstrin homology domaincontaining protein in controlling chemotaxis in dictyostelium. J. Cell Biol.
153, 795– 810.
Huang, Y.E., Iijima, M., Parent, C.A., Funamoto, S., Firtel, R.A., and
Devreotes, P.N. (2003). Receptor mediated regulation of PI3Ks confines
PI(3, 4, 5)P3 to the leading edge of chemotaxing cells. Mol. Biol. Cell 14,
1313–1322.
Iijima, M., and Devreotes, P. (2002). Tumor suppressor PTEN mediates
sensing of chemoattractant gradients. Cell 109, 599 – 610.
Iijima, M., Huang, Y.E., and Devreotes, P. (2002). Temporal and spatial
regulation of chemotaxis. Dev. Cell 3, 469 – 478.
Janetopoulos, C., Jin, T., and Devreotes, P. (2001). Receptor-mediated
activation of heterotrimeric G-proteins in living cells. Science 291, 2408 –
2411.
Meili, R., Ellsworth, C., Lee, S., Reddy, T.B., Ma, H., and Firtel, R.A. (1999).
Chemoattractant-mediated transient activation and membrane localization

Molecular Biology of the Cell

Signalling Patches by Uniform cAMP
of Akt/PKB is required for efficient chemotaxis to cAMP in Dictyostelium.
EMBO J. 18, 2092–2105.
Parent, C.A., Blacklock, B.J., Froehlich, W.M., Murphy, D.B., and Devreotes, P.N. (1998). G protein signaling events are activated at the leading
edge of chemotactic cells. Cell 95, 81–91.
Parent, C.A., and Devreotes, P.N. (1999). A cell’s sense of direction. Science
284, 765–770.
Potma, E., de Boeij, W.P., van Haastert, P.J., and Wiersma, D.A. (2001).
Real-time visualization of intracellular hydrodynamics in single living
cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 1577–1582.
Servant, G., Weiner, O.D., Herzmark, P., Balla, T., Sedat, J.W., and Bourne,
H.R. (2000). Polarization of chemoattractant receptor signaling during
neutrophil chemotaxis. Science 287, 1037–1040.
Swanson, J.A., and Taylor, D.L. (1982). Local and spatially coordinated movements in
Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae during chemotaxis. Cell 28, 225–232.

Vol. 14, December 2003

Theibert, A., and Devreotes, P.N. (1983). Cyclic 3⬘, 5⬘-AMP relay in Dictyostelium discoideum: adaptation is independent of activation of adenylate cyclase. J. Cell Biol. 97, 173–177.
Van Haastert, P.J., and Van der Heijden, P.R. (1983). Excitation, adaptation, and deadaptation of the cAMP-mediated cGMP response in Dictyostelium discoideum. J. Cell Biol. 96, 347–353.
Varnum, B., and Soll, D.R. (1984). Effects of cAMP on single cell motility in
Dictyostelium. J. Cell Biol. 99, 1151–1155.
Xiao, Z., Zhang, N., Murphy, D.B., and Devreotes, P.N. (1997). Dynamic
distribution of chemoattractant receptors in living cells during chemotaxis
and persistent stimulation. J. Cell Biol. 139, 365–374.
Zigmond, S.H., Levitsky, H.I., and Kreel, B.J. (1981). Cell polarity: an
examination of its behavioral expression and its consequences for polymorphonuclear leukocyte chemotaxis. J. Cell Biol. 89, 585–592.

5027

