JCB: ARTICLE

Localized Ras signaling at the leading edge regulates
PI3K, cell polarity, and directional cell movement
Atsuo T. Sasaki, Cheryl Chun, Kosuke Takeda, and Richard A. Firtel
Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, and Center for Molecular Genetics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093

THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY

D

uring chemotaxis, receptors and heterotrimeric
G-protein subunits are distributed and activated almost uniformly along the cell membrane,
whereas PI(3,4,5)P3, the product of phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K), accumulates locally at the leading edge.
The key intermediate event that creates this strong
PI(3,4,5)P3 asymmetry remains unclear. Here, we show
that Ras is rapidly and transiently activated in response
to chemoattractant stimulation and regulates PI3K activity. Ras activation occurs at the leading edge of chemotaxing cells, and this local activation is independent of the

F-actin cytoskeleton, whereas PI3K localization is dependent on F-actin polymerization. Inhibition of Ras results
in severe defects in directional movement, indicating that
Ras is an upstream component of the cell’s compass.
These results support a mechanism by which localized
Ras activation mediates leading edge formation through
activation of basal PI3K present on the plasma membrane and other Ras effectors required for chemotaxis.
A feedback loop, mediated through localized F-actin
polymerization, recruits cytosolic PI3K to the leading
edge to amplify the signal.

Introduction
Eukaryotic cells of diverse origin exhibit common mechanisms
for sensing and migrating to a chemoattractant source. Cells
can respond to chemoattractant gradients as shallow as a 2–5%
difference between the anterior and posterior of the cell by converting this shallow external gradient into a steep intracellular
gradient of signaling components (Parent and Devreotes, 1999;
Chung et al., 2001a). Of major importance is understanding the
mechanisms by which cells amplify this shallow extracellular
gradient into a steep intracellular gradient that then mediates directional movement and the formation of a stable cellular polarity.
Part of the regulatory pathway that controls directional
sensing is the establishment of a steep intracellular gradient at
the leading edge of PI(3,4)P2 and PI(3,4,5)P3, the products of
Class I phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks), important mediators of chemotaxis (Iijima et al., 2002; Merlot and Firtel,
2003). Chemoattractant stimulation elicits a rapid, transient
translocation to the activated plasma membrane of a subfamily of PH domain-containing proteins that preferentially bind
PI(3,4)P2/PI(3,4,5)P3 (Parent et al., 1998; Meili et al., 1999;
Servant et al., 2000). These proteins preferentially localize to
the leading edge of chemotaxing cells; their spatially restricted

The online version of this article includes supplemental material.
Correspondence to R.A. Firtel: rafirtel@ucsd.edu
Abbreviations used in this paper: GEF, GDP/GTP exchange factor; LatA, latrunculin A; myr, myristoyl; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase.
© The Rockefeller University Press $8.00
The Journal of Cell Biology, Vol. 167, No. 3, November 8, 2004 505–518
http://www.jcb.org/cgi/doi/10.1083/jcb.200406177

cortical localization can be induced by placing a micropipette
emitting a chemoattractant near a responsive cell.
These observations lead to a model in which a shallow
chemoattractant gradient becomes highly amplified at the leading edge, in part, through a preferential activation of PI3K and
localization of these PH domain-containing proteins. Studies in
Dictyostelium discoideum cells and in mammalian leukocytes
indicate that chemoattractant receptors and heterotrimeric
G-protein subunits remain distributed fairly uniformly along the
cell membrane (Jin et al., 2000; Iijima et al., 2002; Merlot and
Firtel, 2003). Whereas G plays an essential role in mediating
the biochemical responses resulting in leading edge formation,
the absence of a highly polarized gradient of free G implies
it is not the signal responsible for intracellular amplification of
the chemoattractant gradient and localized activation of PI3K.
Furthermore, activation of the G-protein is persistent, whereas
PI3K activation is transient (Janetopoulos et al., 2001; Funamoto et al., 2002; Huang et al., 2003), indicating a different
component regulates the localized turning on and off of PI3K.
Thus, this initial amplification step lies downstream of G-protein activation and upstream of the generation of the 3-phosphoinositides (Merlot and Firtel, 2003).
The production and regulation of PI(3,4,5)P3 requires
PI3Ks and the 3-phosphoinositide phosphatase PTEN. The
first insight into the mechanisms of locally accumulating
PI(3,4,5)P3 came from studies of the subcellular distribution of
PI3Ks and PTEN in Dictyostelium (Funamoto et al., 2002;

JCB

505

Iijima and Devreotes, 2002). Dictyostelium PI3K transiently
translocates to the plasma membrane in response to chemoattractant stimulation and to the leading edge in chemotaxing
cells, whereas PTEN exhibits a reciprocal pattern of localization. Loss of PTEN causes extended and nonspatially restricted
PI3K activity, indicating that PTEN is required for temporally
and spatially restricting PI(3,4,5)P3 at the leading edge. Cells
expressing a membrane-tagged form of PI3K, which is uniformly distributed along the plasma membrane, form pseudopodia randomly along the plasma membrane when placed in a
chemoattractant gradient, demonstrating that PI3K activation
can directly lead to pseudopod formation. Subsequent studies in
neutrophils have identified a feedback loop between PI(3,4,5)P3
and F-actin accumulation and have confirmed that the posterior
localization of PTEN is conserved in some amoeboid chemotaxing mammalian cell types (Wang et al., 2002; Weiner et al.,
2002; Li et al., 2003; Xu et al., 2003). These regulatory events
are at least partially responsible for eliciting the asymmetry in
signaling that results in directional sensing.
One of the important challenges in studying chemotaxis
is to identify the upstream components that recruit and activate
PI3K at the leading edge. Intensive study provides compelling
evidence for a critical role of Ras in cell growth, differentiation, and survival (Hancock, 2003), yet the roles of Ras in chemotaxis remain to be defined. Ras has been proposed to be an
activator of Class I mammalian and Dictyostelium PI3Ks (Pacold et al., 2000; Funamoto et al., 2002; Suire et al., 2002). Ras
also interacts with other families of proteins required for chemotaxis and cell polarity (Lee et al., 1999), suggesting a
broader regulatory role for Ras beyond PI3K. Furthermore,
null mutations of specific Ras proteins in Dictyostelium have
been implicated in cell movement and chemotaxis (Tuxworth
et al., 1997; Lim et al., 2001).
Here, we examine the regulatory mechanisms by which
the amplified gradient of PI(3,4,5P)3/PI(3,4)P2 is established at
the leading edge. We demonstrate that Ras is an upstream component of the cell’s chemotaxis compass; abolition of Ras function causes a loss of directional cell movement. We further
demonstrate that the translocation of PI3K to the plasma membrane requires the F-actin cytoskeleton and is not part of the
“initial” regulatory response. Our data suggest a model in
which leading edge formation is controlled through an initial
local response that includes localized Ras activation, which
stimulates a small amount of preexisting, membrane-associated
PI3K, causing F-actin polymerization. Positive feedback loops,
one of which involves further recruitment of PI3K from the cytosol to the leading edge, reinforces this pathway to stabilize
the nascent leading edge.

Results
RasG regulates PI3K activity and is
uniformly distributed along the plasma
membrane

Of the five Dictyostelium Ras proteins, RasB, RasD, and RasG
are most closely related to mammalian H-Ras and K-Ras and
have a conserved effector domain (Lim et al., 2002). RasG and
506

JCB • VOLUME 167 • NUMBER 3 • 2004

RasD have been suggested to activate PI3K, as RasG- and RasDGTP interact with the RBDs of PI3K1 and PI3K2 (Funamoto et
al., 2002), and cell movement defects of rasG null cells partially
overlap with those of cells lacking PI3K1 and PI3K2 (Tuxworth
et al., 1997; Funamoto et al., 2002; Lim et al., 2002). Other studies (Lim et al., 2001) show that rasC null cells exhibit chemotaxis defects and reduced Akt/PKB activation, but our studies
have been unable to demonstrate an interaction of RasC-GTP

Figure 1. Ras regulates PI3K signaling and distribution along the membrane. (A and B) Activation of Akt/PKB is shown. Aggregation-stage cells
(see Materials and methods) were treated with 10 M cAMP for the indicated time (A) or at 10 s (B) and then lysed, Akt was immunoprecipitated
with anti-Akt antibody, and Akt activity was assayed (Meili et al., 1999). Akt
protein levels were determined in each sample by Western blot analysis (bottom panels). (C) Fluorescent images of GFP-RasG/rasG null cells exposed to
a chemoattractant gradient (left) or to uniform chemoattractant stimulation
(right). An asterisk indicates the position of the micropipette. The numbers in
the top left corners represent the time after initiation when the image was
captured. The data are representative of eight separate experiments.

with the RBDs of PI3K1 and PI3K2, suggesting that PI3K may
not be a direct RasC effector (Lee et al., 1999).
To test whether or not RasG is involved in PI3K activation, we measured the activation of the PI3K effector Akt/PKB
in rasG null cells in response to chemoattractant stimulation.
Fig. 1 A shows that chemoattractant-induced Akt/PKB activation was decreased in rasG null cells, and this effect was complemented by expressing FLAG- or GFP-tagged wild-type
RasG cDNA from a constitutive actin promoter in rasG null

cells (Fig. 1 B and not depicted). FLAG- and GFP-RasG also
complemented the rasG null cell cytokinesis defect (unpublished data). GFP-RasG displayed uniform localization along
the plasma membrane and cytosol in chemotaxing cells, unstimulated cells, and cells that were stimulated globally with a
uniform, rapidly applied, saturating level of chemoattractant
(Fig. 1 C). As rasG null cells only show a partial reduction in
Akt/PKB activation, we expect other Ras proteins are involved
in PI3K activation.
Rapid and transient activation of Ras in
response to cAMP

Figure 2. Activation of Dictyostelium Ras. The FLAG-RasG or endogenous Ras activation level in response to cAMP was assayed by a GST-RBD
pull-down assay (see Materials and methods). Cells were stimulated with
cAMP for the indicated duration, and the amount of Ras protein bound to
GST-RBD was determined by Western blotting with the indicated antibody. The activated Ras was quantified by densitometry and normalized
with total Ras. Cells were treated with 50 M LY294002 or DMSO as a
control for 20 min before the addition of cAMP (C). Similar results were
observed over at least three independent experiments.

The partial requirement of RasG for PI3K activation suggests
that RasG and possibly other Dictyostelium Ras proteins are activated in response to chemoattractant stimulation. To examine
this suggestion, we used a GST-RBD of Raf1 in a pull-down assay that has been used to determine Ras activation in mammalian cells (Taylor et al., 2001). The rationale for using the RBD
of Raf1 was that Dictyostelium RasG (and RasB and RasD) and
mammalian H-Ras and K-Ras have identical effector domains
(Lim et al., 2002). The RBD of Raf1 bound strongly to Dictyostelium constitutively activated (Q61L) RasG, RasB, and RasD
but not to their dominant negative forms (S17N) in yeast twohybrid and in vitro binding assays (unpublished data). Interestingly, RasGQ61L bound more strongly to the Raf1 RBD than to
either the PI3K1 or PI3K2 RBD (unpublished data). Fig. 2 A illustrates that the RasG activation level is rapidly stimulated in
response to cAMP, peaking at 5 s, after which the level of
RasG-GTP rapidly decreases. The same results were obtained
by using rasG null cells expressing GFP-tagged RasG (unpublished data). The kinetics of activation and subsequent adaptation are consistent with those of cAMP-stimulated PI3K activity
(Huang et al., 2003). While we were preparing our manuscript
for submission, an independent report also demonstrated chemoattractant-mediated RasG activation using the RBD of Byr2 (Kae
et al., 2004; see Discussion).
We also measured the activation level of endogenous Ras
proteins (those whose GTP-bound state binds to the Raf1
RBD) by using an anti–pan-Ras antibody that should recognize
some or all Dictyostelium Ras proteins. Fig. 2 B indicates that
endogenous Ras proteins are activated by cAMP stimulation
with timing kinetics similar to those of RasG. We expect our
assay does not recognize RasC, as it binds poorly to the Raf1
RBD (Kae et al., 2004). The activation level of endogenous
Ras proteins is only partially reduced in rasG null cells (unpublished data), indicating that Ras proteins in addition to RasG
are activated. These data demonstrate that multiple endogenous
Ras proteins are rapidly and transiently activated in response to
chemoattractant stimulation and potentially provide an explanation of why rasG null cells may still exhibit a moderate level
of chemoattractant-mediated Akt/PKB activation.
Several papers concluded that Ras is activated downstream of PI3K signaling (Chan et al., 2002; Yart et al., 2002).
We used LY294002, a pharmacological PI3K inhibitor, to examine this possibility. Fig. 2 C illustrates that Ras proteins can
be activated in the presence of LY294002. In addition, we observed Ras activation in pi3k1/2 null cells (unpublished data).
RAS REGULATION OF CHEMOTAXIS • SASAKI ET AL.

507

These results indicate that Ras can be initially activated without PI3K signaling. However, we cannot eliminate the existence of a feedback loop between PI3K downstream signaling
and Ras activation, as the Ras activation level is decreased by
LY294002 treatment.
Ras activation in living cells

To determine the spatial-temporal kinetics of Ras activation in
living cells, we used the GFP-tagged RBD of Raf1, which binds
to and thus should monitor Ras-GTP levels and its localization
in cells (Chiu et al., 2002; Hancock, 2003). We investigated the
GFP-RBD localization in randomly moving vegetative cells. As
illustrated in Fig. 3 A, resting vegetative cells display an even
cytoplasmic fluorescent signal with labeling of regions of membrane ruffling and circular, “crown-like” structures, which may
be the precursors of macropinosomes. These are the regions in
which F-actin and PI(3,4,5)P3 accumulate and to which PI3K
specifically translocates (Parent et al., 1998; Funamoto et al.,
2001, 2002). In aggregation-competent cells, which are differentiated by cAMP pulsing and competent to chemotax to
cAMP, PH domain-containing proteins (e.g., CRAC, Akt/PKB,
and PhdA) and PI3K rapidly translocate to the plasma membrane in response to global stimulation with a chemoattractant
(Parent et al., 1998; Meili et al., 1999; Funamoto et al., 2002).
We measured the kinetics of PH domain and PI3K cortical localizations using a faster and more sensitive camera than used
previously, allowing us to see differences in the initial steps of
the two responses (Funamoto et al., 2002). As shown in Fig. 3
C, the translocation of PI3K occurs faster than that of the PH
domain, whereas the loss of PI3K from the plasma membrane
occurs more slowly than that of the PH domain. For this work,
we use the NH2-terminal domain of PI3K1 (N-PI3K1) that does
not contain the RBD and is necessary and sufficient for PI3K
localization. This reporter exhibits the same subcellular localization and kinetics of localization as GFP-PI3K (Funamoto et
al., 2002). Interestingly, GFP-RBD also rapidly and transiently
localizes to the plasma membrane in response to global stimulation (Fig. 3 B and Video 1, available at http:www.jcb.org/cgi/
content/full/jcb.200406177/DC1). The signal intensity of GFPRBD was significantly weaker than that of the PH domain-containing proteins, possibly because the potential binding sites for
PH domains (PI(3,4,5)P3/PI(3,4)P2) are amplified relative to
Ras-GTP by the catalytic activity of PI3K, thus providing an
amplified signal, and/or because of our inability to obtain
strains expressing high levels of RBD-GFP compared with
the levels of expression of GFP fusions of PH domains and
N-PI3K. The weaker signal could also be caused by the affinity
of the Raf1 RBD for Ras-GTP in an in vivo cellular context.
Quantitation of the kinetics of GFP-RBD translocation
indicates Ras is activated with levels peaking at 3–6 s, and
this initial Ras activation occurs as early as N-PI3K1 translocation (Fig. 3 C). Thus, Ras activation (determined by GFP-RBD
membrane localization) is contemporaneous with or possibly
precedes that of N-PI3K1. We observe a delay in the initiation
of PH domain-containing PhdA and CRAC translocation, the
expected result if Ras-driven PI3K activation and PI(3,4,5)P3
production are required for PH domain localization (Fig. 3 C).
508

JCB • VOLUME 167 • NUMBER 3 • 2004

The kinetics of PH domain localization correspond to the kinetics of Ras-GTP, suggesting Ras-GTP levels regulate the PI3K
response. GFP-RBD and N-PI3K1 translocation occurred in
both pi3k1/2 null cells and LY294002-treated cells, whereas
PhdA and CRAC did not detectably translocate in either pi3k1/2
null cells or LY294002-treated cells (Fig. 3 D). These data suggest that initial Ras activation as well as PI3K translocation occur upstream of PI3K signaling, and Ras is at least one of the
key intermediate molecules between the chemoattractant receptor and PI3K activation.
Ras is activated at the leading edge of
chemotaxing cells

To study the spatial localization of signaling events in chemotaxing cells, we placed GFP-RBD–expressing cells in a
chemoattractant gradient created by micropipette filled with
chemoattractant. In chemotaxing cells, GFP-RBD exclusively
localized to the leading edge (Fig. 3, E and F; and Video 2,
available at http:www.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/jcb.200406177/
DC1). To assess the qualitative dynamics and specificity of the
GFP-RBD localization, we changed the pipette position to the
opposite side of the cell (Fig. 3 F). The GFP-RBD signal was
rapidly lost from the initial site and concomitantly reaccumulated at the new site on the membrane closest to the micropipette. GFP-RBD thus accumulated at the region of the future
front of the cell, which then produced a pseudopod (Fig. 3 F).
As shown in Fig. 3 G, this localized Ras activation also occurred in pi3k1/2 null cells, suggesting localized Ras activation
does not require PI3K activity, as we had previously observed
that cells expressing myristoyl (myr)-tagged PI3K1 produce
multiple pseudopodia (Funamoto et al., 2002). In these cells,
GFP-RBD accumulates at these sites of new functional pseudopodia formation (Fig. 3 H), providing a correlation between activated Ras and pseudopod formation. In addition,
GFP-RBD localizes to the pseudopodia in randomly migrating
wild-type cells (unpublished data). As pten null and PTEN hypomorphic cells exhibit a similar random localization of PH domain reporters (Funamoto et al., 2002; Iijima and Devreotes,
2002), we also examined GFP-RBD localization in pten null
cells (Iijima and Devreotes, 2002). In pten null cells, GFP-RBD
localized to the membrane in response to a global stimulation
and accumulated at the multiple sites of new pseudopodia during random migration (Fig. 3 H and Video 3, available at http:
www.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/jcb.200406177/DC1). Occasionally, membrane localization of GFP-RBD was observed at the
rear of a cell, in which case the cell started to move “backward”
relative to the chemoattractant gradient (Fig. 3 I and Video 3).
From this series of observations, we conclude that activated Ras
localizes to the leading edge and to membrane domains that will
form a leading edge. We previously demonstrated that PI3K activation, as determined by Akt activation, requires a functional
Ras binding domain, which is consistent with a requirement of
Ras for mammalian PI3K activation (Funamoto et al., 2002).
As myr-PI3K–expressing cells and pten null cells have high
basal PI(3,4,5)P3 (Funamoto et al., 2001, 2002; Iijima and Devreotes, 2002), these observations also suggest the possible existence of PI(3,4,5)P3-mediated feedback Ras activation.

Figure 3. Spatial-temporal activation of Ras during chemotaxis. (A and B) The localization of GFP-RBD in wild-type vegetative cells (A) or aggregationcompetent cells (B) was imaged. Translocation of GFP-RBD was imaged after stimulation with cAMP as described previously (Funamoto et al., 2001).
(C) Translocation kinetics of GFP-tagged PhdA, CRAC-PH, N-PI3K1, and RBD in wild-type cells were obtained from time-lapse recordings. The graphs represent an average of data of movies taken from at least three separate experiments. The fluorescence intensity of membrane-localized GFP fusion protein
was quantitated as Et as defined in Materials and methods. (D) Translocation of indicated GFP proteins in pi3k1/2 null cells or wild-type cells treated with
50 M LY294002 for 20 min before cAMP stimulation. (E–I) Fluorescent images of GFP-RBD expressing wild-type cells (E and F), pi3k1/2 null cells (G), or
pten null and myr-PI3K expressing cells (I) chemotaxing in a gradient of chemoattractant. An asterisk indicates the position of the micropipette. Fluorescent
images of GFP-RBD and myr-PI3K1–expressing pi3k1/2 null cells (H, left) or GFP-RBD-expressing pten null cells (H, right) are shown. The sites producing
multiple pseudopodia are marked with arrowheads.

PI3K localization and Ras activation are
differentially regulated

In response to chemoattractant stimulation, Dictyostelium and
mammalian cell types exhibit a rapid burst of F-actin polymerization, which is followed by a rapid decrease to a near-

basal level and a subsequent slower rise to a peak level 1/3
as high as the initial peak (Hall et al., 1988). The initial
F-actin peak is similar in timing to Ras activation and PI3K
translocation. Therefore, we examined if F-actin polymerization was needed to locally activate leading-edge signaling
RAS REGULATION OF CHEMOTAXIS • SASAKI ET AL.

509

Figure 4. Differential regulation between PI3K translocation and Ras activation. (A and B) Effect of LatA on the translocation of GFP-tagged PhdA-,
N-PI3K1–, and RBD-expressing wild-type cells and pten null cells. Asterisk indicates the position of the micropipette (B). These images were captured 30 s
after changing the micropipette position. The behaviors were consistently observed over five independent sessions. Translocation kinetics of RBD were
obtained from a time-lapse recording of GFP-RBD–expressing wild-type cells. Fluorescence intensities of the upper and lower plasma membranes were
quantitated as Et (see Materials and methods). (C) Effect of LatA on Akt/PKB activation. Akt/PKB assays were performed as described in Fig. 1. Data are
representative of at least three independent experiments. (D) N-PI3K1 is recruited into the Triton X-100–resistant cytoskeleton in response to chemoattractant
stimulation. Cytoskeletal fractions (see Materials and methods) were subjected to SDS-PAGE. Actin and N-PI3K1 recruitment were assessed with Coomassie
stain or anti-GFP antibody, respectively. Ras activation was assayed using an aliquoted lysate. Graph shows an average of the results that were obtained
from four independent experiments. (E) Fluorescent images of GFP-tagged N-PI3K1–expressing wild-type cells. Cells were treated with (right) or without
(left) 0.01% Triton X-100 before fixation by 3.7% formaldehyde.

events using the F-actin polymerization inhibitor latrunculin
A (LatA). After LatA treatment, cells became progressively
rounder and stopped moving (Parent et al., 1998). Consistent
510

JCB • VOLUME 167 • NUMBER 3 • 2004

with previous findings, under these conditions, there was a reduced amount of F-actin associated with the Triton X-100–
insoluble cortical fraction and chemoattractant stimulation did

not induce F-actin polymerization (Fig. 4 D). As in previous
work (Parent et al., 1998), a global stimulation of LatAtreated cells resulted in a rapid cortical localization of the PHdomain-containing protein (Fig. 4 A).
We investigated the effect of the actin cytoskeleton on
N-PI3K1 localization. We expected that, like PH domain-containing proteins, N-PI3K1 would translocate to the membrane
in response to chemoattractant stimulation in the presence of
LatA. However, after treatment with LatA, we observed a very
low, basal level of cortically associated N-PI3K1, and this
amount did not increase in response to chemoattractant stimulation (Fig. 4 A). In the presence of lower levels of LatA, which
did not completely block F-actin polymerization, we observed
a weak N-PI3K1 cortical localization in response to chemoattractant stimulation (unpublished data). When a micropipette containing a chemoattractant was placed near the cells,
N-PI3K1 showed no directed cortical accumulation (Fig. 4 B).
We have done parallel experiments with GFP fusions of the
complete PI3K1 and PI3K2 and with the NH2-terminal localization domain of PI3K2 (Funamoto et al., 2002), and the
chemoattractant-mediated translocation of these reporters is
also blocked by LatA (unpublished data). This finding confirms that PI(3,4,5)P3 can accumulate at the side of the cell
closest to the chemoattractant source without de novo asymmetric PI3K localization. These data suggest the presence of a
basal level of PI3K on the plasma membrane in unstimulated
cells. Unstimulated cells do not show obvious PI3K localized
to the plasma membrane (Fig. 4 E); however, such a cortical
PI3K pool may be occluded by a large cytoplasmic pool. To
examine this possibility, we removed the cytoplasmic fraction
by mild Triton X-100 treatment. Fig. 4 E shows the presence of
some PI3K localized to the plasma membrane before chemoattractant stimulation. We suggest cells have a low, basal level of
preexisting PI3K at the plasma membrane that is activated
upon chemoattractant stimulation.
To verify the involvement of the actin cytoskeleton in
PI3K distribution, we extracted the cytoskeletal fraction. In
control cells (not treated with LatA), N-PI3K1 became associated with the cytoskeletal fraction after chemoattractant stimulation, whereas LatA strongly inhibited N-PI3K1 cytoskeleton
association. Under the same conditions, Ras was activated by
cAMP in the presence of LatA, although the level was decreased compared with that in control cells (Fig. 4 D). Consistent with the results from Fig. 4 (A and B), our observations
suggest that chemoattractant-mediated N-PI3K1 localization,
but not the initial Ras activation, requires F-actin polymerization. Our findings suggest that localized PI(3,4,5)P3 production
is cooperatively regulated by localized Ras activation and
F-actin–mediated recruitment of PI3K.
To elucidate the mechanisms of local PI(3,4,5)P3 production in the presence of LatA, we examined where Ras is activated in these cells. In response to global chemoattractant stimulation, GFP-RBD translocated uniformly to the whole plasma
membrane. In response to a directional signal, GFP-RBD accumulated on the site of the plasma membrane closest to the micropipette (Fig. 4 B and Video 4, available at http:www.jcb.org/
cgi/content/full/jcb.200406177/DC1). Upon changing the posi-

tion of the micropipette, GFP-RBD redistributed toward the
new position of the micropipette (Fig. 4 B). The change in
membrane fluorescence with the change in the position of the
micropipette is plotted in Fig. 4 B. These results demonstrate
that eukaryotic cells can spatially sense a directional chemoattractant signal at a step downstream of G protein activation and
upstream of Ras activation without an actin cytoskeleton. However, PI3K localization, and presumably the amplification of
the PI3K signal, requires F-actin polymerization. Consistent
with this hypothesis, we observe a reduction in Akt/PKB activation in LatA-treated cells (Fig. 4 C). Thus, in the absence
of an F-actin cytoskeleton, chemoattractants induce a basal
PI(3,4,5)P 3 response, which is amplified by subsequent
F-actin–mediated PI3K accumulation at the plasma membrane
at the site closest to the chemoattractant source.
It was recently reported that PTEN accumulates at the
posterior even in the presence of LatA, suggesting the possibility that PTEN regulates local PI(3,4,5)P3 levels in the presence
of LatA (Iijima et al., 2004). To examine this hypothesis further, we tested whether or not GFP-N-PI3K1 localized to the
front of pten null cells. Consistent with our findings in wildtype cells, we found that GFP-N-PI3K1 in LatA-treated pten
null cells did not translocate upon chemoattractant stimulation
(Fig. 4, A and B). We observed that in pten null cells in the
presence of LatA, GFP-RBD, GFP-CRAC, and GFP-PhdA
(Fig. 4 B and not depicted) accumulated toward the micropipette. When the position of the micropipette was moved, the reporters rapidly delocalized from the original site and immediately reaccumulated on the membrane at a site closest to the
new position of the micropipette (Fig. 4 B). The only difference in the spatial localization of PhdA between wild-type and
pten null cells was that the size of the arc was larger in pten
null cells. This finding is consistent with PTEN localizing to
the lateral sides and posterior of cells and being required to
help spatially restrict the PI3K response (Funamoto et al.,
2002; Iijima and Devreotes, 2002; Iijima et al., 2004). These
studies on PI3K indicate that the presence or absence of PTEN
does not affect PI3K localization and, as in wild-type cells, this
localization is dependent on localized F-actin polymerization.
These data also suggest that the localization of PTEN is not essential for the regulation of local PI(3,4,5)P3 levels in the presence of LatA; directional Ras activation occurs in the absence
of F-actin, directional PI3K localization, and PTEN.
Ras, PI3K, and F-actin form a positive
feedback loop

Although initial Ras activation requires neither PI3K activity
nor F-actin polymerization, the Ras activation level was reduced in the presence of LY294002 or LatA (Figs. 3 and
4). Furthermore, Ras was spontaneously activated at multiple
sites in randomly moving (no chemoattractant) pten null cells.
Those observations suggest that Ras itself may be activated, in
part, by events involving PI(3,4,5)P3 and F-actin polymerization. To examine this hypothesis, we treated randomly moving
pten null cells with LY294002. After the drug treatment, both
spontaneous PhdA accumulation at the membrane and the formation of multiple pseudopodia were completely abolished
RAS REGULATION OF CHEMOTAXIS • SASAKI ET AL.

511

Figure 5. Feedback loop–mediated Ras/PI3K activation. (A) Fluorescent images of indicated GFP-protein expressing pten null cells before or 5 min after
50-M LY294002 treatment or 25 min after 5 M LatA treatment, and 20 min after the removal of LatA. (B) Fluorescent images of GFP-PhdA– and
RasGQ61L-expressing rasG null cells.

(Fig. 5 A). The result is consistent with high PI(3,4,5)P3 inducing F-actin polymerization in pten null cells PI3K (Iijima et al.,
2004). Strikingly, spontaneous PI3K localization and Ras activation at multiple pseudopodia also completely disappeared
after LY294002 treatment. The results suggest that, under
some conditions such as “stochastic activation” during random
movement, PI3K may regulate Ras activation and PI3K localization through PI(3,4,5)P3-mediated signaling. We further examined the possible involvement of F-actin polymerization in
activating Ras and PI3K in randomly moving pten null cells.
The “spontaneous” (no external stimulation) Ras activation,
PIP3 accumulation, and PI3K localization gradually decreased
in pten null cells after LatA addition. The loss of these responses coincided with an inability to make new F-actin, as
judged by a complete smoothness of the cell surface. After removal of the LatA, cells regained the spontaneous Ras activation, PI(3,4,5)P3 accumulation, and PI3K localization at sites of
F-actin accumulation (protrusions; Fig. 5 A). The findings suggest that F-actin is important for observable autonomous Ras
and PI3K activation. As Ras is required for PI3K activation, we
suggest that Ras and PI3K activation are tightly connected
through a positive feedback loop.
As PI(3,4,5)P3 could induce F-actin–dependent Ras activation, we examined if constitutively activated Ras could in512

JCB • VOLUME 167 • NUMBER 3 • 2004

duce persistent PI(3,4,5)P3 production. We coexpressed constitutively active RasGQ61L and PhdA in rasG null cells. After
chemoattractant stimulation, we observe a rapid, transient,
global accumulation of PI(3,4,5)P3, followed by persistent
PI(3,4,5)P3 production at a localized site on the membrane
(Fig. 5 B). When cells are pretreated with LatA, this persistent
PI(3,4,5)P3 production is blocked (Fig. 5 B). These data are
consistent with those in Fig. 5 A and suggest that F-actin and/or
F-actin–mediated PI3K recruitment is required for extended
PI3K activation. These findings are consistent with a model in
which robust Ras/PI3K activation, as well as pseudopod formation, depends on a feedback loop comprising Ras, PI3K, and
F-actin, although the initial Ras activation can occur without
PI(3,4,5)P3 and F-actin. In support of this conclusion, we note
that the level of Ras activation is reduced in the presence of
LatA (Fig. 4, A and D).
Ras regulates cell polarity and
directionality of the chemotaxing cells

Our previous findings that a functional RBD is required for
Dictyostelium PI3K activation (Funamoto et al., 2002) and our
observations here that Ras is activated at the leading edge suggest that RasG and Ras proteins of related function may be required for directional sensing. Further, several studies have im-

Figure 6. Ras signaling regulates proper
chemotaxis. (A–F) Time-lapse recording of
chemotaxis of indicated strains pulsed with
cAMP for 6 h. An asterisk indicates the position of a micropipette containing 150 M
cAMP. Tracing of the chemotaxis of individual
cells is shown. The expression level of myctagged RasGS17N in aleA null cells was monitored by immunofluorescence (E, inset). (G)
Analysis of chemotaxis using DIAS software
(Soll and Voss, 1998). Speed refers to the
speed of the cell’s centroid movement along
the total path. Directionality is a measure of
how straight the cells move. Direction change
(Dire Ch) is a measure of the number and frequency of turns the cell makes. Roundness is
an indication of the polarity of the cells.

plicated Ras in chemotaxis: rasG null cells have a slight loss of
motility (Tuxworth et al., 1997; Lim et al., 2002), and a null
mutation of the RasG-GTP binding protein RIP3 exhibits chemotaxis defects (Lee et al., 1999). Fig. 6 (A, B, and G; and
Videos 5 and 6, available at http:www.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/
jcb.200406177/DC1) extends these studies and shows that
rasG null cells, compared with wild-type cells, exhibit reduced
cell polarity and directionality (persistent movement toward
the chemoattractant source).
Dominant-negative forms of small GTPases inhibit downstream function by blocking the activity of their cognate exchange factor (GDP/GTP exchange factor [GEF]). To further
examine the roles of Ras in chemotaxis, we expressed domi-

nant-negative RasGS17N in rasG null cells, which should block
the activation of other Ras proteins that are regulated by GEFs
sensitive to inhibition by RasGS17N. As expected if expression
of RasGS17N were to inhibit Ras activation and thus decrease
the activity of a downstream effector such as PI3K, we observed that activation of Ras, Akt/PKB, and PI(3,4,5)P3 production (as illustrated by PhdA membrane localization) in
RasGS17N/rasG null cells was significantly reduced (but not
eliminated) compared with rasG null cells (Fig. 7 A). Fig. 7 A
also shows that as one titrates down Ras function (wild-type,
rasG null, and RasGS17N/rasG null cells), there is a decrease in
chemoattractant-mediated F-actin polymerization. When chemotaxis was assayed, RasGS17N/rasG null cells produced nuRAS REGULATION OF CHEMOTAXIS • SASAKI ET AL.

513

Figure 7. Activation of Akt/PKB and Ras. The effects of RasGS17N on Akt/PKB, Ras activation, and production of PI(3,4,5)P3 in rasG (A) and aleA (B) null
cells were assayed as described in the legends to Figs. 1–4. The results were similar in five independent assays.

merous small pseudopodia at right or oblique angles to the direction of the cAMP gradient and displayed severe polarization
and migration defects with very little forward movement (Fig.
6 C and Video 7, available at http:www.jcb.org/cgi/content/
full/jcb.200406177/DC1). These results suggest that, in addition to RasG, other Ras proteins play an important role in controlling the ability of cells to polarize and move. Our observation that these cells produce multiple pseudopodia on all sides
when placed in a chemoattractant gradient suggests that the
cells cannot effectively sense direction. These cells are able
to polymerize F-actin, as illustrated by the ability to extend
pseudopodia, but the absolute level of chemoattractant-mediated F-actin polymerization is reduced (Fig. 7 A).
To examine the possibility that Ras signaling may control
directional cell movement, we took advantage of aleA null
cells, which carry a disruption of a gene encoding the putative
Ras GEF Aimless and which were described as exhibiting aberrant chemotaxis (Insall et al., 1996). Fig. 7 B illustrates that
the level of Ras activation is significantly reduced in aleA null
cells compared with wild-type cells, suggesting that aberrant
514

JCB • VOLUME 167 • NUMBER 3 • 2004

Ras signaling in aleA null cells might cause the aleA null chemotaxis defects. Next, we examined in greater detail the aleA
null cell chemotaxis defects. Interestingly, aleA null cells were
able to polarize and move well, although they displayed some
defect in the directionality of movement toward the chemoattractant source (Fig. 6 D and Video 8, available at http:
www.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/jcb.200406177/DC1), as previously suggested (Insall et al., 1996). This finding suggests Rasmediated directional sensing may be independent from Rasmediated cell polarization.
As there are 20 putative Ras GEFs in the Dictyostelium
genome (Wilkins et al., 2000), we took advantage of the reduction in Ras activation in aleA null cells by expressing RasGS17N
in these cells to potentially block other GEFs that activate
RasG and other Ras proteins, using the same logic as when expressing RasGS17N in rasG null cells. RasGS17N/aleA null cells
show a further reduction in Ras and Akt/PKB activation compared with aleA null cells (Fig. 7 B). These cells appear to produce very little PI(3,4,5)P3 in response to a chemoattractant
(Fig. 7 B). When chemotaxis was examined, we observed two

different types of behavior, both of which are more severe than
aleA null cell phenotypes. One phenotype was very similar to
RasGS17N/rasG null cells: a loss in cell polarity and cells did
not move very far (Fig. 6 E and Video 9, available at http:
www.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/jcb.200406177/DC1). The other
phenotype was that cells polarized and moved but it took several minutes longer for these cells to polarize than aleA null
cells. Once RasGS17N/aleA null cells polarized, they exhibited
persistent movement, but the direction of movement was completely random relative to the direction of the chemoattractant
source (Fig. 6 F and Video 9). The cells that exhibited this behavior were heterogenous in that different cells polarized with
different kinetics (see Video 9). As might be expected, we observed a range of GFP-RasGS17N expression levels (Fig. 6 E, inset), suggesting that differences in kinetics or severity of the responses is the result of different expression levels. The results
suggest Ras pathways are critical for regulating both cell polarity and directional movement.

Discussion
Ras plays an essential role in regulating
directionality and cell polarity

We previously proposed that Ras is an essential regulator of
Dictyostelium PI3Ks based on our observations that PI3K carrying a mutation in the Ras binding domain is unable to activate PI3K-dependent responses (Funamoto et al., 2002). Here,
we demonstrate that Ras is rapidly and transiently activated
upon global chemoattractant stimulation and that in chemotaxing cells, activated Ras, but not total Ras, is restricted to the
cell’s leading edge. This finding parallels that of Mochizuki et
al. (2001), in which activated Ras was found at the peripheral
edges of the plasma membrane in growth factor–stimulated
COS-1 cells. A report that was published as we were submitting this manuscript also demonstrated that RasG is activated in
response to chemoattractant stimulation (Kae et al., 2004).
Their findings show a significantly more prolonged activation
or the possibility of a bimodal activation profile. We are uncertain of the reason for this difference but the kinetics of RasG
activation from our biochemical assay correspond to the kinetics of the cortical localization of the RBD-GFP probe and the
kinetics of PI3K activation (Huang et al., 2003). As the Raf1
RBD does not effectively bind RasC-GTP (Kae et al., 2004),
we do not think that our work examines RasC.
Our results implicate Ras as an essential part of the cell’s
compass that controls the ability of cells to sense a chemoattractant gradient. As previously reported (Insall et al., 1996),
we find that aleA null cells exhibit reduced directionality without a significant loss in cell polarity or speed. Further depletion
of Ras function through the expression of RasGS17N in aleA null
cells causes severe directionality defects. A portion of these
cells and rasG null/RasGS17N cells show a severe loss of movement, even though they produce cell protrusions in response to
chemoattractant stimulation. However, the protrusions occur at
random sites independent of the direction of the chemoattractant source. In the second phenotype, cells polarize in response
to a directional signal, but do so much more slowly than wild-

Figure 8. Model for the spatial and temporal regulation of Ras-induced
chemotaxis. A model illustrating the intracellular signaling leading to local
PI(3,4,5)P3 production is shown. (A) Resting cells with a basal level of
PI3K at the plasma membrane. (B) The chemoattractant locally activates
Ras at the presumptive leading edge (site closest to the chemoattractant
source), where Ras then locally activates PI3K. There is a local polymerization of F-actin at the presumptive leading edge, which is partially Ras/PI3K
independent, presumably controlled by Rho GTPase, WASP/SCAR, and
Arp2/3. Our data suggest that the F-actin mediates PI3K translocation.
(C) Locally produced PI(3,4,5)P3 induces further F-actin polymerization
by activating downstream effectors, which would enhance the recruitment
of PI3K to the membrane.

type cells. Most importantly, the direction of movement of
these cells is essentially random relative to the direction of the
chemoattractant source. As the level of Ras activation was
reduced through a knockout of RasG and then expression
of RasGS17N in these cells, we observed a sequential loss of
chemoattractant-mediated F-actin polymerization.
We suggest that Ras may control chemotaxis through effectors in addition to PI3K. The directionality defect caused by
depleting Ras function is significantly more severe than that
of pi3k1/2 null cells or cells treated with 30 M LY294002
RAS REGULATION OF CHEMOTAXIS • SASAKI ET AL.

515

(Funamoto et al., 2001). RasG-GTP binds to RIP3 (Ras interacting protein-3), an orthologue of the TOR complex 2 protein
AVO1 in yeast, which has an orthologue in mammalian cells
(Lee et al., 1999; Loewith et al., 2002). rip3 null cells are less
polarized, migrate more slowly than wild-type cells, and produce pseudopodia at right or oblique angles to the direction of
the chemoattractant source leading to a loss in directionality.
We suggest the severe defect in cell polarization conferred by
RasGS17N is due to its suppression of PI3K and RIP3, and likely
other effectors. Although rasG null cells expressing RasGS17N
have significantly reduced PI3K pathway activation (assayed
by Akt activation), some activity remains, probably resulting from an inability to fully inhibit Ras activation through
RasGS17N expression as shown by our data.
Local PI(3,4,5)P 3 production is achieved
cooperatively by local Ras activation,
PI3K localization, and feedback loops

When a chemoattractant gradient is applied to cells, both
PI(3,4,5)P3 accumulation and Ras activation occur locally at
the site on the plasma membrane closest to the micropipette.
We suggest that the localized increase of PI(3,4,5)P3 is the result of coordination between F-actin–independent local Ras activation and F-actin–driven PI3K localization (Fig. 8). The kinetics of Ras activation, F-actin polymerization, and PI3K
translocation are similar, although our detailed analysis suggests that Ras activation (membrane localization of the GFPRBD reporter) slightly precedes the localization of N-PI3K1.
Strikingly, we found that translocation of N-PI3K1 (and fulllength PI3K1 and PI3K2) is regulated by F-actin polymerization. We have shown that unstimulated cells have a low, basal
level of PI3K on the plasma membrane.
We suggest that F-actin cytoskeleton-independent Ras
activation controls the initial PI3K response at the leading
edge, when cells first respond to a chemoattractant gradient.
This provides an initial amplification of the shallow extracellular gradient through the highly localized production of PIP3 and
the localization of PH domain proteins. As PI3K-mediated
PI(3,4,5)P3 production is required for full F-actin polymerization (Funamoto et al., 2001; Iijima and Devreotes, 2002; Chen
et al., 2003), further amplification of the Ras-PI3K response results from a positive feedback loop comprising PI(3,4,5)P3induced F-actin polymerization, PI3K localization, and Ras activation, which may help stabilize the nascent leading edge and
aid persistent cell movement (Fig. 8). Consistent with this
model, we show that concentrations of LatA that fully inhibit
F-actin polymerization reduce the activity of the PI3K pathway
(PKB activation), as might be expected if robust PI3K translocation to the membrane requires F-actin polymerization. A separate feedback loop whereby PI(3,4,5)P3 causes activation of
PI3K has been proposed (Niggli, 2000; Wang et al., 2002).
The F-actin feedback loop we propose parallels a similar
model proposed by the Bourne laboratory in which PI3K and
F-actin are part of a feedback loop regulated by Rac GTPases that promotes leading edge function (Wang et al., 2002;
Weiner et al., 2002). These findings parallel previous observations in Dictyostelium that PI3K is required for full F-actin po516

JCB • VOLUME 167 • NUMBER 3 • 2004

lymerization and enhancement of the PI3K pathway through
the deletion of PTEN, which causes an augmented F-actin response (Chung et al., 2001b; Funamoto et al., 2001; Iijima and
Devreotes, 2002; Chen et al., 2003). In separate studies, we
found that Dictyostelium RacB, which binds to the CRIB domains of Dictyostelium PAKa, PAKc, and WASP, has a biphasic activation profile paralleling that of F-actin. Disruption of
RacB causes a 50% decrease in both peaks of chemoattractant-mediated F-actin polymerization (Park et al., 2004). RacB
activation is partially dependent on PI3K and is enhanced in a
PTEN hypomorphic strain. These findings provide a mechanism by which both PI3K-dependent and -independent pathways stimulate F-actin polymerization.
Spatially aberrant Ras activation and adventitious pseudopod formation are observed in pi3k1/2 null cells expressing
myr-PI3K, which is uniformly localized around the plasma
membrane. A similar response is seen in pten null cells, as
the normal mechanisms that restrict PI(3,4,5)P3 levels and its
localization to the leading edge are absent (Funamoto et al.,
2002; Iijima and Devreotes, 2002). Aberrant lateral pseudopodia are also formed in both Dictyostelium cells and leukocytes
lacking myosin II assembly in the cell’s posterior (Wessels et
al., 1988; Chung and Firtel, 1999; Worthylake and Burridge,
2003; Xu et al., 2003). We suggest that feedback loops exist in
which cells, as they become more polarized and form a stable
leading edge and posterior, are more resistant to adventitious
pseudopod formation along the lateral sides and posterior of
the cell. We expect that reduced Ras function limits the ability
to form a single, stable pseudopod and concomitantly results in
adventitious pseudopod formation, as the pathways that control
the feedback loops controlling the actin cytoskeleton are not
sufficiently robust (Fig. 8).

Materials and methods
Materials
We obtained LatA, LY294002, and anti-FLAG (M2) antibody from SigmaAldrich, monoclonal anti-Ras (Ab-3) antibody from Oncogene Research
Products, and rabbit anti-GFP (FL) and anti-myc antibodies from Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. The GFP-Raf Ras-binding domain (GST-RBD) was
generated by PCR amplification of the coding region 1–146 and subcloned into the EcoRI–XhoI site of GFP-EXP4() or that of pGEX4T-3. All
constructs were sequenced. We produced GST-RBD in BL21 bacteria
(Stratagene) and purified it on glutathione-sepharose (Amersham Biosciences) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. The pten null strain and
CRAC-PH expression vector were obtained from P. Devreotes (Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD) and the aleA null cells were obtained from R. Insall (University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK).
Biochemical assays
PKB activity was measured as described previously (Meili et al., 1999).
The F-actin–enriched, Triton X-100–insoluble cytoskeleton was isolated as
described previously (Steimle et al., 2001). For the Ras pull-down assay,
the cell extract was incubated with 10 g of GST-RBD on glutathione-agarose beads at 4C for 30 min in the presence of 5 mg/ml BSA. The beads
were washed three times. Ras proteins were separated on a 14% SDSPAGE gel and immunoblotted with the appropriate antibody.
Chemotaxis and image acquisition
The analyses of chemotaxis toward cAMP and global responses to cAMP
were performed as described previously (Chung and Firtel, 1999) and the
data were analyzed with the DIAS program (Soll and Voss, 1998). Images were collected on a microscope (model TE300; Nikon) with DIC and
fluorescence imaging and 40/0.60 and 60/1.40 objectives using a

Coolsnap-HQ camera. Initial images were captured using Metamorph
software. Quantitation of membrane or cortical localization of GFP fusion
proteins and the analysis of chemotaxis of each strain represents the averages of at least five cells from at least three separate experiments. We
measured the intensity of cortical GFP using NIH Image software. The level
of peripheral GFP is defined as Et and is calculated by dividing the intensity before stimulation (E0) by the intensity at each time point (Et). E0 is set
at 1.0. E is the intensity at the membrane minus the background intensity
divided by the intensity of the cytosol minus the background intensity. For
the LatA experiments, cells were pretreated with 3 M of LatA (SigmaAldrich) for 20 min before assay.
Online supplemental material
Videos 1–3, which show the localization of the GFP-RBD in response to
global stimulation (Video 1) and chemotaxing (Video 2) in wild-type cells
and in pten null cells (Video 3), correspond to Fig. 3 in the text. Video 4
shows GFP-RBD translocation in the LatA-treated cells and corresponds to
Fig. 4 B. Videos 5–9 show chemotaxis of wild-type (Video 5), rasG null
(Video 6), RasGS17N/rasG null (Video 7), aleA null (Video 8), and
RasGS17N/aleA null (Video 9) cells and correspond to Fig. 6 in the text.
Online supplemental material is available at http://www.jcb.org/cgi/
content/full/jcb.200406177/DC1.
We thank Firtel laboratory members for their stimulating discussions and helpful suggestions, Susan Lee and Yung Duong for excellent technical assistance,
and Jennifer Roth and Michelle Mendoza for help in preparing this manuscript. We thank A. Yoshimura for critical comments, M. Iijima and P. Devreotes for the pten null strain, and R. Insall for the aleA null strain.
A.T. Sasaki was supported, in part, by a Japanese Society for the
Promotion of Science Research Fellowship for Research Abroad. This work
was funded by research grants from the United States Public Health Service
to R.A. Firtel.

Submitted: 29 June 2004
Accepted: 23 September 2004

References
Chan, T.O., U. Rodeck, A.M. Chan, A.C. Kimmelman, S.E. Rittenhouse, G.
Panayotou, and P.N. Tsichlis. 2002. Small GTPases and tyrosine kinases
coregulate a molecular switch in the phosphoinositide 3-kinase regulatory subunit. Cancer Cell. 1:181–191.
Chen, L., C. Janetopoulos, Y.E. Huang, M. Iijima, J. Borleis, and P.N. Devreotes. 2003. Two phases of actin polymerization display different dependencies on PI(3,4,5)P3 accumulation and have unique roles during
chemotaxis. Mol. Biol. Cell. 14:5028–5037.
Chiu, V., T. Bivona, A. Hach, J. Sajous, J. Silletti, H. Wiener, R.N. Johnson, A.
Cox, and M. Philips. 2002. Ras signalling on the endoplasmic reticulum
and the Golgi. Nat. Cell Biol. 4:343–350.
Chung, C.Y. and R.A. Firtel. 1999. PAKa, a putative PAK family member, is
required for cytokinesis and the regulation of the cytoskeleton in Dictyostelium discoideum cells during chemotaxis. J. Cell Biol. 147:559–575.
Chung, C., S. Funamoto, and R. Firtel. 2001a. Signaling pathways controlling
cell polarity and chemotaxis. Trends Biochem. Sci. 26:557–566.
Chung, C., G. Potikyan, and R. Firtel. 2001b. Control of cell polarity and chemotaxis by Akt/PKB and PI3 kinase through the regulation of PAKa.
Mol. Cell. 7:937–947.
Funamoto, S., K. Milan, R. Meili, and R. Firtel. 2001. Role of phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase and a downstream pleckstrin homology domain–containing protein in controlling chemotaxis in Dictyostelium. J. Cell Biol. 153:
795–810.
Funamoto, S., R. Meili, S. Lee, L. Parry, and R. Firtel. 2002. Spatial and temporal regulation of 3-phosphoinositides by PI 3-kinase and PTEN mediates
chemotaxis. Cell. 109:611–623.
Hall, A.L., A. Schlein, and J. Condeelis. 1988. Relationship of pseudopod extension to chemotactic hormone-induced actin polymerization in amoeboid cells. J. Cell. Biochem. 37:285–299.
Hancock, J.F. 2003. Ras proteins: different signals from different locations. Nat.
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 4:373–384.
Huang, Y., M. Iijima, C. Parent, S. Funamoto, R. Firtel, and P. Devreotes. 2003.
Receptor-mediated regulation of PI3Ks confines PI(3,4,5)P3 to the leading edge of chemotaxing cells. Mol. Biol. Cell. 14:1913–1922.
Iijima, M., and P. Devreotes. 2002. Tumor suppressor PTEN mediates sensing
of chemoattractant gradients. Cell. 109:599–610.
Iijima, M., Y. Huang, and P. Devreotes. 2002. Temporal and spatial regulation

of chemotaxis. Dev. Cell. 3:469–478.
Iijima, M., Y.E. Huang, H.R. Luo, F. Vazquez, and P.N. Devreotes. 2004. Novel
mechanism of PTEN regulation by its phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate binding motif is critical for chemotaxis. J. Biol. Chem. 279:16606–
16613.
Insall, R.H., J. Borleis, and P.N. Devreotes. 1996. The aimless RasGEF is required for processing of chemotactic signals through G-protein-coupled
receptors in Dictyostelium. Curr. Biol. 6:719–729.
Janetopoulos, C., T. Jin, and P. Devreotes. 2001. Receptor-mediated activation
of heterotrimeric G-proteins in living cells. Science. 291:2408–2411.
Jin, T., N. Zhang, Y. Long, C. Parent, and P. Devreotes. 2000. Localization of
the G protein betagamma complex in living cells during chemotaxis. Science. 287:1034–1036.
Kae, H., C.J. Lim, G.B. Spiegelman, and G. Weeks. 2004. Chemoattractantinduced Ras activation during Dictyostelium aggregation. EMBO Rep.
5:602–606.
Lee, S., C.A. Parent, R. Insall, and R.A. Firtel. 1999. A novel Ras-interacting
protein required for chemotaxis and cyclic adenosine monophosphate
signal relay in Dictyostelium. Mol. Biol. Cell. 10:2829–2845.
Li, Z., M. Hannigan, Z. Mo, B. Liu, W. Lu, Y. Wu, A.V. Smrcka, G. Wu, L. Li,
M. Liu, et al. 2003. Directional sensing requires G beta gamma-mediated
PAK1 and PIX alpha-dependent activation of Cdc42. Cell. 114:215–227.
Lim, C., G. Spiegelman, and G. Weeks. 2001. RasC is required for optimal activation of adenylyl cyclase and Akt/PKB during aggregation. EMBO J.
20:4490–4499.
Lim, C.J., G.B. Spiegelman, and G. Weeks. 2002. Cytoskeletal regulation by
Dictyostelium Ras subfamily proteins. J. Muscle Res. Cell Motil. 23:
729–736.
Loewith, R., E. Jacinto, S. Wullschleger, A. Lorberg, J.L. Crespo, D. Bonenfant,
W. Oppliger, P. Jenoe, and M.N. Hall. 2002. Two TOR complexes, only
one of which is rapamycin sensitive, have distinct roles in cell growth
control. Mol. Cell. 10:457–468.
Meili, R., C. Ellsworth, S. Lee, T. Reddy, H. Ma, and R. Firtel. 1999. Chemoattractant-mediated transient activation and membrane localization of Akt/
PKB is required for efficient chemotaxis to cAMP in Dictyostelium.
EMBO J. 18:2092–2105.
Merlot, S., and R. Firtel. 2003. Leading the way: Directional sensing through
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and other signaling pathways. J. Cell Sci.
116:3471–3478.
Mochizuki, N., S. Yamashita, K. Kurokawa, Y. Ohba, T. Nagai, A. Miyawaki,
and M. Matsuda. 2001. Spatio-temporal images of growth-factorinduced activation of Ras and Rap1. Nature. 411:1065–1068.
Niggli, V. 2000. A membrane-permeant ester of phosphatidylinositol 3,4, 5-trisphosphate (PIP(3)) is an activator of human neutrophil migration. FEBS
Lett. 473:217–221.
Pacold, M., S. Suire, O. Perisic, S. Lara-Gonzalez, C. Davis, E. Walker, P.
Hawkins, L. Stephens, J. Eccleston, and R. Williams. 2000. Crystal
structure and functional analysis of Ras binding to its effector phosphoinositide 3-kinase gamma. Cell. 103:931–943.
Park, K.C., F. Rivero, R. Meili, S. Lee, F. Apone, and R.A. Firtel. 2004. Rac
regulation of chemotaxis and morphogenesis in Dictyostelium. EMBO J.
doi:10.1038/sj.emboj.7600368.
Parent, C., and P. Devreotes. 1999. A cell’s sense of direction. Science. 284:
765–770.
Parent, C., B. Blacklock, W. Froehlich, D. Murphy, and P. Devreotes. 1998. G
protein signaling events are activated at the leading edge of chemotactic
cells. Cell. 95:81–91.
Servant, G., O. Weiner, P. Herzmark, T. Balla, J. Sedat, and H. Bourne. 2000.
Polarization of chemoattractant receptor signaling during neutrophil chemotaxis. Science. 287:1037–1040.
Soll, D.R., and E. Voss. 1998. Two- and three-dimensional computer systems
for analyzing how animal cells crawl. In Motion Analysis of Living
Cells. D.R. Soll and D. Wessels, editors. Wiley-Liss, New York. 25–52.
Steimle, P.A., S. Yumura, G.P. Cote, Q.G. Medley, M.V. Polyakov, B. Leppert,
and T.T. Egelhoff. 2001. Recruitment of a myosin heavy chain kinase to
actin-rich protrusions in Dictyostelium. Curr. Biol. 11:708–713.
Suire, S., P. Hawkins, and L. Stephens. 2002. Activation of phosphoinositide
3-kinase gamma by Ras. Curr. Biol. 12:1068–1075.
Taylor, S., R. Resnick, and D. Shalloway. 2001. Nonradioactive determination
of Ras-GTP levels using activated ras interaction assay. Methods Enzymol. 333:333–342.
Tuxworth, R., J. Cheetham, L. Machesky, G. Spiegelmann, G. Weeks, and R.
Insall. 1997. Dictyostelium RasG is required for normal motility and cytokinesis, but not growth. J. Cell Biol. 138:605–614.
Wang, F., P. Herzmark, O. Weiner, S. Srinivasan, G. Servant, and H. Bourne.
2002. Lipid products of PI(3)Ks maintain persistent cell polarity and di-

RAS REGULATION OF CHEMOTAXIS • SASAKI ET AL.

517

rected motility in neutrophils. Nat. Cell Biol. 4:513–518.
Weiner, O., P. Neilsen, G. Prestwich, M. Kirschner, L. Cantley, and H. Bourne.
2002. A PtdInsP(3)- and Rho GTPase-mediated positive feedback loop
regulates neutrophil polarity. Nat. Cell Biol. 4:509–513.
Wessels, D., D.R. Soll, D. Knecht, W.F. Loomis, A. De Lozanne, and J. Spudich. 1988. Cell motility and chemotaxis in Dictyostelium amebae lacking myosin heavy chain. Dev. Biol. 128:164–177.
Wilkins, A., J.R. Chubb, and R.H. Insall. 2000. A novel Dictyostelium RasGEF
is required for normal endocytosis, cell motility and multicellular development. Curr. Biol. 10:1427–1437.
Worthylake, R.A., and K. Burridge. 2003. RhoA and ROCK promote migration
by limiting membrane protrusions. J. Biol. Chem. 278:13578–13584.
Xu, J., F. Wang, A. Van Keymeulen, P. Herzmark, A. Straight, K. Kelly, Y.
Takuwa, N. Sugimoto, T. Mitchison, and H. Bourne. 2003. Divergent
signals and cytoskeletal assemblies regulate self-organizing polarity in
neutrophils. Cell. 114:201–214.
Yart, A., S. Roche, R. Wetzker, M. Laffargue, N. Tonks, P. Mayeux, H. Chap,
and P. Raynal. 2002. A function for phosphoinositide 3-kinase beta lipid
products in coupling beta gamma to Ras activation in response to lysophosphatidic acid. J. Biol. Chem. 277:21167–21178.

518

JCB • VOLUME 167 • NUMBER 3 • 2004

