© 2017. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Journal of Cell Science (2017) 130, 1545-1558 doi:10.1242/jcs.177170

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Protein kinase A regulates the Ras, Rap1 and TORC2 pathways in
response to the chemoattractant cAMP in Dictyostelium

ABSTRACT
Efficient directed migration requires tight regulation of
chemoattractant signal transduction pathways in both space and
time, but the mechanisms involved in such regulation are not well
understood. Here, we investigated the role of protein kinase A (PKA)
in controlling signaling of the chemoattractant cAMP in Dictyostelium
discoideum. We found that cells lacking PKA display severe
chemotaxis defects, including impaired directional sensing.
Although PKA is an important regulator of developmental gene
expression, including the cAMP receptor cAR1, our studies using
exogenously expressed cAR1 in cells lacking PKA, cells lacking
adenylyl cyclase A (ACA) and cells treated with the PKA-selective
pharmacological inhibitor H89, suggest that PKA controls
chemoattractant signal transduction, in part, through the regulation
of RasG, Rap1 and TORC2. As these pathways control the ACAmediated production of intracellular cAMP, they lie upstream of PKA
in this chemoattractant signaling network. Consequently, we propose
that the PKA-mediated regulation of the upstream RasG, Rap1 and
TORC2 signaling pathways is part of a negative feedback mechanism
controlling chemoattractant signal transduction during Dictyostelium
chemotaxis.
KEY WORDS: Chemotaxis, Migration, PKA, Negative feedback,
Directional sensing, Chemotactic signaling

INTRODUCTION

Chemotaxis, the ability of cells to detect and migrate up chemical
(chemoattractant) gradients, is a conserved cellular behavior that is
not only essential to normal human physiology but is also
implicated in the onset and progression of diseases (BravoCordero et al., 2012; Kolaczkowska and Kubes, 2013; Richardson
and Lehmann, 2010; Sadik and Luster, 2012; Theveneau and
Mayor, 2012; Zernecke and Weber, 2010). The detection of
chemoattractants by cells triggers an intracellular network of signal
transduction pathways that coordinately control the ability of cells to
interpret the gradient, polarize and move (Artemenko et al., 2014).
Moreover, these processes are often coupled to the paracrine release
of chemoattractants that relay the original signal to promote group
cell migration (Afonso et al., 2012; Garcia and Parent, 2008;
Wyckoff et al., 2004). In order for cells to efficiently perform
chemotaxis, chemoattractant signal transduction pathways are
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ
85721-0088, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work
‡

Author for correspondence ( pcharest@email.arizona.edu)
A.R.P., 0000-0002-9908-8457; P.G.C., 0000-0002-2395-5294

Received 8 July 2015; Accepted 6 March 2017

tightly regulated in both space and time, and adapt to persistent
stimulation (Charest and Firtel, 2006; Hoeller et al., 2014; Wang,
2009). Adaptation is believed to be necessary for cells to sense and
respond to increasing chemoattractant concentrations as they
migrate up the gradient (Chang and Levchenko, 2013). However,
very little is understood about the mediators of adaptation and the
regulatory mechanisms involved in the spatiotemporal control of
chemotactic signaling.
In the established chemotaxis experimental model Dictyostelium
discoideum, Ras-family GTPases, including RasC, RasG and Rap1,
are critical mediators of the chemotactic response to cAMP (Charest
and Firtel, 2007). Rap1 controls cell–substrate adhesion and cell
polarity by promoting remodeling of both actin and myosin, in part,
through phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), Rac, the serine/
threonine kinase Phg2, as well as through the regulation of the
Target of Rapamycin Complex 2 (TORC2) (Jeon et al., 2007a;
Khanna et al., 2016; Kortholt et al., 2006, 2010; Mun and Jeon,
2012; Plak et al., 2013). RasG activates PI3K, thereby controlling
the site of F-actin polymerization and the direction of migration
(Bolourani et al., 2006; Sasaki et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2008).
Tight spatiotemporal regulation of RasG is critical for gradient
sensing during chemotaxis (Takeda et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2008).
Finally, RasC directly promotes TORC2 activation, thereby
modulating F-actin dynamics and controlling cAMP production
by adenylyl cyclase A (ACA, encoded by acaA) (Bolourani et al.,
2006; Cai et al., 2010; Charest et al., 2010; Khanna et al., 2016). In
addition, we have found that a negative-feedback mechanism
promotes adaptation of chemoattractant-stimulated RasC activity
(Charest et al., 2010). Downstream from RasC, TORC2-activated
Akt/protein kinase B (PKB) and PKB-related PKBR1 (also known
as PKGB) phosphorylate the scaffold protein Sca1, which
assembles a RasC-activating complex containing the RasCspecific guanine exchange factor (GEF) Aimless (also known as
RasGEFA). Phosphorylation of Sca1 by PKB kinases inhibits the
localization of the Sca1 complex to the plasma membrane, thereby
preventing further RasC activation. Interestingly, phosphorylation
of Sca1 by PKB kinases is elevated in cells that lack the PKA
catalytic subunit (PKA-C; pkaC null cells) (Charest et al., 2010).
Since the RasC–TORC2–PKB-kinase pathway controls the ACAmediated intracellular production of cAMP, this pathway promotes
PKA activation in response to extracellular cAMP chemoattractant
stimulation (Charest et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2005; Lim et al., 2001).
Thus, these previous observations indicate that PKA might regulate
the RasC–TORC2–PKB-kinase signaling pathway during
chemotaxis through a negative-feedback loop.
cAMP in Dictyostelium plays two different and completely
separate roles: that of an extracellular chemoattractant and that of an
intracellular signaling molecule (Reymond et al., 1995). Since
cAMP is membrane impermeable, the extracellular cAMP acting as
chemoattractant for Dictyostelium does not directly activate PKA, it
1545

Journal of Cell Science

Margarethakay Scavello*, Alexandra R. Petlick*, Ramya Ramesh, Valery F. Thompson, Pouya Lotfi and
Pascale G. Charest‡

only acts through stimulation of specific seven-transmembrane
cAMP chemoattractant receptors (cARs; Insall et al., 1994). In
response to the chemoattractant stimulation, intracellular cAMP is
produced by ACA, and part of this cAMP is used to activate PKA
and part is used for relaying the chemoattractant signal to
neighboring Dictyostelium cells by being actively exported
outside of the cells through ABC transporters (Garcia and Parent,
2008; Miranda et al., 2015).
The role of PKA in Dictyostelium development and
morphogenesis is well characterized (Loomis, 1998), whereas its
role in chemotaxis is not understood. PKA is required for the
starvation-induced aggregation of Dictyostelium cells (Mann and
Firtel, 1991; Mann et al., 1997), a process driven by chemotaxis,
and was found to be involved in controlling the directional
extension of pseudopods during migration (Stepanovic et al.,
2005; Zhang et al., 2003). In mammalian cells, PKA has been
shown to play a central role in actin-based cell migration through the
differential regulation of Rac, Rho and Rap1 GTPases, as well as of
VASP, PI3K, PAK and LIM kinases, at the leading edge of
migrating cells (Chen et al., 2005; Howe, 2004; Howe et al., 2005;
Jones and Sharief, 2005; Lim et al., 2008; Nadella et al., 2009;
Paulucci-Holthauzen et al., 2009; Takahashi et al., 2013; Toriyama
et al., 2012; Zimmerman et al., 2013).
The present study was undertaken to investigate the role of
PKA in controlling chemotactic signaling pathways and directed
cell migration in Dictyostelium. We performed a detailed
characterization of the effect that the lack of PKA activity in
Dictyostelium has on chemotaxis in response to cAMP and on the
regulation of known cAMP-induced responses in Dictyostelium. We
found that, in cells lacking PKA function, many early cAMPinduced chemotactic responses, including RasG, Rap1, PI3K,
TORC2, PKB and PKBR1 activation, are upregulated and fail to be
spatially restricted upon exposure to cAMP gradients. Therefore,
our results suggest that PKA is necessary for proper spatiotemporal
regulation of early chemoattractant signal transduction pathways,
which is critical to Dictyostelium chemotaxis. Although this
regulatory mechanism might include the PKA-mediated
transcriptional control of additional involved proteins, our study
suggests that direct control of the signaling pathways by PKA could
explain the observed effects.
RESULTS
pkaC null cells are unable to perform chemotaxis

To investigate the role of PKA in Dictyostelium chemotaxis along a
cAMP gradient, we started by characterizing the chemotaxis
phenotypes of Dictyostelium cells that lacked PKA-C ( pkaC null)
and compared these phenotypes to those of wild-type cells. pkaC
null cells are viable and, although they have been shown to lack
expression of ACA (Mann et al., 1997), pkaC and acaA null cells
express key aggregative genes when provided with exogenous
cAMP pulses (Mann et al., 1992, 1997; Pitt et al., 1993). Hence, in
such conditions, the use of pkaC null cells should be informative as
to the role of PKA in chemotaxis. Using cells that were responsive
to the chemoattractant cAMP ( pulsed with exogenous cAMP for
5.5 h), we found that pkaC null cells exhibit severe chemotaxis
defects (Fig. 1). Developed wild-type cells placed in an
exponential cAMP gradient polarize and migrate efficiently,
whereas pkaC null cells do not polarize and they extend
pseudopods in random directions, often in directions opposite to
the gradient (Fig. 1A; Movies 1 and 2). As a consequence, pkaC
null cells display poor persistence of movement (0.16±0.07 versus
0.79±0.09 for wild-type cells; mean±s.d.) and completely fail to
1546

Journal of Cell Science (2017) 130, 1545-1558 doi:10.1242/jcs.177170

Fig. 1. The chemotaxis phenotype of pkaC null cells. (A) Morphology of
wild-type (WT) and pkaC null cells ( pkaC—) exposed to a cAMP gradient. The
direction of the gradient is indicated by the arrow. Scale bar: 10 μm. (B) Traces
of representative cells migrating in an exponential cAMP gradient created by a
point source. The starting point of each cell was apposed to the axis origin. The
arrow indicates the direction of the gradient. (C) Quantitative analysis of the
chemotactic behavior of cells (13 WT and eight pkaC null cells) from three
independent experiments. Motility speed represents the total path length
divided by time; migration speed represents the total linear displacement (end
point–starting point) divided by time; persistence indicates path linearity and
was calculated as the linear displacement divided by total path length;
chemotactic index represents the directionality of the cells’ movements relative
to the gradient. Data are mean±s.d.

migrate towards the chemoattractant source, in this case a
micropipette filled with 150 μM cAMP (chemotactic index of
0.03±0.07 versus 0.76±0.12 for wild-type cells) (Fig. 1B,C).
However, the pkaC null cells are motile and display an averaged
displacement speed of 4.9±1.4 µm/min compared to 5.8±0.9 µm/
min for wild-type cells (Fig. 1C). To verify that this phenotype is
not unique to this pkaC null strain, we tested another strain, in
which PKA-C had been independently disrupted by another group
(HBW1; Primpke et al., 2000). However, we found that these cells
are a little heterogeneous and unstable as the phenotypes changed
with passages in cell culture. Nevertheless, we found that young
HBW1 cells, compared to their control cells (HBW2), have severe
chemotaxis defects and have cAMP-induced responses similar to
those of the other pkaC null cells (Fig. S1).
Taken together, our analyses suggests that, although pkaC null
cells are unable to perform chemotaxis, they do extend protrusions
and move. These observations then suggest that PKA is not required
for cell motility in Dictyostelium but is essential for the
establishment of cell polarity and chemotaxis towards cAMP.
pkaC null cells fail to properly localize and temporally
regulate F-actin and myosin

To explore the underlying causes for the strong chemotaxis defects
of pkaC null cells, we first assessed the spatiotemporal dynamics of
F-actin in cells using the fluorescent reporter Lifeact-GFP (Riedl
et al., 2008). As previously described (Chung and Firtel, 1999), we
observe that migrating wild-type cells display cortical F-actin and
F-actin-rich pseudopods at the leading edge (Fig. 2A; Movie 3).
Cells lacking PKA also display cortical F-actin, but, consistent with
the observed pkaC null chemotaxis phenotype, these cells exhibit
many small and randomly localized F-actin-rich protrusions
(Fig. 2A; Movie 4). Lifeact-GFP labeling of F-actin allowed us to
observe that these protrusions, although they sometimes produce a

Journal of Cell Science

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Journal of Cell Science (2017) 130, 1545-1558 doi:10.1242/jcs.177170

Fig. 2. Spatiotemporal dynamics of F-actin and myosin in pkaC null cells. Live imaging of F-actin (Lifeact-GFP) and Myosin II (GFP-labeled myosin light
chain, GFP–MyoII) fluorescent reporters in cells exposed to an exponential gradient of cAMP (A, arrows indicate the direction of the gradient) and in cells uniformly
stimulated with 5 μM cAMP for the indicated times (B). Scale bars: 10 μm. (C) Relative fluorescence intensity of Lifeact-GFP in cells uniformly stimulated with
cAMP for the indicated times. Data represent the mean fluorescence intensity±s.e.m. of 71 wild-type (WT) T and 48 pkaC null ( pkaC—) cells. (D) cAMP-induced
F-actin polymerization measured by phalloidin binding, expressed as a fold over the basal level. (Inset) Basal F-actin levels measured according to protein mass,
expressed as a fold over the WT basal levels. Data represent the mean±s.e.m. of five different experiments. *P<0.05 in a two-tailed t-test compared to
corresponding wild-type samples. (E) Relative cytosolic fluorescence intensity of GFP–MyoII in cells that had been uniformly stimulated with cAMP for the
indicated times. Data represent the mean fluorescence intensity±s.e.m. of 91 WT and 50 pkaC null cells. Imaging data are representative of at least three
independent experiments.

pseudopod that correlates with random movement of the cell, often
form an endocytic cup or are just retracted. In addition, in cells that
were pulsed with cAMP, washed and then left to rest instead of
being exposing to a cAMP gradient, we observed that, in contrast to

wild-type cells displaying low basal levels of F-actin, most pkaC
null cells display elevated basal levels of F-actin enriched within
numerous spontaneous protrusions that often look like membrane
ruffles rather than pseudopods (Fig. 2B,D; Movies 5 and 6).
1547

Journal of Cell Science

RESEARCH ARTICLE

cAMP stimulation of wild-type Dictyostelium cells produces a
biphasic F-actin polymerization response, with a sharp first peak at
5 s, which is linked to actin cytoskeleton reorganization (cringe
response), and a lower but wider peak at 30-60 s post stimulation
associated with pseudopod protrusion (Fig. 2B–D; Movies 5 and 6)
(Hall et al., 1989). By contrast, pkaC null cells display considerably
higher basal F-actin levels (near significant difference with P=0.07)
and, as a likely consequence, a blunted F-actin polymerization
response, with a markedly smaller first peak followed by limited
depolymerization and prolonged elevated levels of F-actin
(Fig. 2B–D; Movies 5 and 6). Taken together, these results
suggest that F-actin levels are upregulated in resting pkaC null cells
and that F-actin is both temporally and spatially misregulated in
migrating cells that lack PKA-C.
Similarly, we investigated the spatiotemporal profile of myosin II
in cells that had been exposed to cAMP using GFP-fused myosin
heavy chain A (GFP–MyoII) (Chung and Firtel, 1999). As reported
previously, GFP–MyoII is excluded from the leading edge and
localizes to the sides and posterior of migrating wild-type cells
(Fig. 2A) (Chung and Firtel, 1999). Resting, unstimulated wild-type
cells display basal levels of GFP–MyoII at the cell cortex, which
rapidly delocalizes to the cytosol upon uniform cAMP stimulation
(Fig. 2B) (Jeon et al., 2007a). This delocalization is then followed by
an increase in cortical GFP–MyoII, peaking at ∼30-40 s, and a return
to basal levels by 60 s post stimulus (Fig. 2B,E). In pkaC null cells,
we observed some heterogeneity in the spatiotemporal dynamics of
GFP–MyoII. On average, however, we found that pkaC null cells that
were either unstimulated or had been exposed to a cAMP gradient
display relative cortical levels of GFP–MyoII similar to those of wildtype cells, with GFP–MyoII being excluded from extended
protrusions and enriched in retracting protrusions (Fig. 2A,B).
Consistent with the observed random extension of membrane
protrusions in migrating pkaC null cells, the cortical localization of
GFP–MyoII in these cells was not restricted to the side of the cells that
faced the lowest cAMP concentrations but was observed on any side
of the cells, changing frequently and displaying no directional bias
(Fig. 2A). In addition, we observed that, upon uniform cAMP
stimulation, GFP–MyoII at the cell cortex of pkaC null cells
translocates to the cytosol with delayed kinetics compared to those in
wild-type cells and then only slowly returns to basal cortical levels
(Fig. 2B,E). These results suggest that, in addition to F-actin, the
timing and localization of myosin II assembly in cells that lack
PKA-C are misregulated during chemotaxis.
Cells lacking PKA function have elevated PI3K, TORC2, PKB
and PKBR1 activity

We have previously found that the phosphorylation of Sca1
mediated by PKB kinases is elevated in pkaC null cells (Charest
et al., 2010). To then investigate the mechanism by which PKA
controls cytoskeletal remodeling and chemotaxis, we assessed the
kinase activity of PKB and PKBR1 in cells that lacked PKA-C. We
observed that the basal levels of PKB and PKBR1 kinase activity are
elevated and the cAMP-induced stimulation of PKB and PKBR1
activity is prolonged in pkaC null cells compared to that in wild-type
cells (Fig. 3A). We also observed that in cells lacking ACA, PKB and
PKBR1 display similarly elevated basal activity levels and prolonged
cAMP-induced activation, although these effects are less pronounced
than those observed in pkaC null cells (Fig. 3A). This finding is not
surprising because, although ACA is responsible for most of the
chemoattractant-induced cAMP production in Dictyostelium, some
cAMP is produced in acaA null cells and, thus, these cells are
expected to have residual PKA activity (Bagorda et al., 2009; Kim
1548

Journal of Cell Science (2017) 130, 1545-1558 doi:10.1242/jcs.177170

et al., 1998; Söderbom et al., 1999). Consistent with the observed
elevated PKB and PKBR1 activity levels in pkaC null cells, these
cells also display higher basal phosphorylation levels and extended
cAMP-induced phosphorylation of cellular substrates of PKB kinases
compared to those found in wild-type cells (Fig. 3B), reminiscent of
the Sca1 phosphorylation profile previously shown in these cells
(Charest et al., 2010). Thus, these results suggest that PKB and
PKBR1 activities are upregulated in cells that lack PKA function.
Two upstream pathways co-regulate the activity of PKB and
PKBR1 during cAMP chemotaxis in Dictyostelium: (1) the PI3Kdependent pathway that leads to the phosphoinositide-dependent
protein kinase (PDK)-mediated phosphorylation of the activation
loop in PKB and PKBR1; and (2) the TORC2 pathway leading to
phosphorylation of the hydrophobic motif in PKB and PKBR1
(Kamimura and Devreotes, 2010; Liao et al., 2010). We asked
whether the elevated activity of PKB and PKBR1 in pkaC null cells
results from upregulated PI3K and/or TORC2 activity. To assess
PI3K activity, we expressed a fluorescent phosphatidylinositol
(3,4,5)-trisphosphate [PI(3,4,5)P3] reporter comprising the
pleckstrin homology domain of the cytosolic regulator of adenylyl
cyclase fused to GFP (PHcrac–GFP) (Dormann et al., 2002; Parent
et al., 1998). We observed that PHcrac–GFP mostly localized to the
cytosol of resting wild-type cells with occasional enrichment to the
plasma membrane of extended protrusions, whereas many
unstimulated pkaC null cells displayed membrane-localized
PHcrac–GFP at structures corresponding to protrusions,
membrane ruffles and endocytic cups (Fig. 3C). During
chemotaxis in response to cAMP, PHcrac–GFP localizes to the
front of chemotaxing wild-type cells, as previously described
(Dormann et al., 2002; Parent et al., 1998), whereas in pkaC null
cells exposed to the cAMP gradient, the PI(3,4,5)P3 reporter
localizes randomly around the cell cortex, corresponding to the
numerous randomly extended protrusions (Fig. 3D), reminiscent of
the localization of the F-actin reporter Lifeact-GFP described above.
As previously reported, uniform cAMP stimulation induces the
temporary translocation of PHcrac–GFP from the cytosol to the
plasma membrane, peaking at ∼8 s, reflecting PI3K activation and
transient PI(3,4,5)P3 accumulation at this site (Fig. 3E; Movie 7).
After peaking at ∼8 s post-cAMP stimulation, the levels of PHcrac–
GFP at the membrane of wild-type cells decrease below prestimulus levels, consistent with previous observations (Tang et al.,
2014). In contrast, pkaC null cells display a reduced PHcrac–GFP
translocation response, when normalized to their respective basal
levels, with a slightly delayed and broader peak that reaches a
maximum at ∼10-12 s before returning to pre-stimulus levels
(Fig. 3E; Movie 8). Therefore, these observations indicate that PI
(3,4,5)P3 production is misregulated both temporally and spatially
in cells that lack PKA.
As a measure of TORC2 activity, we assessed the TORC2mediated phosphorylation of PKB and PKBR1 at their hydrophobic
motifs (HM) before and upon cAMP stimulation, as previously
described (Kamimura et al., 2009). In contrast to wild-type cells in
which the TORC2 phosphorylation of PKB and PKBR1 HMs is
very transient, peaking at 5-10 s and returning to basal levels by 40 s
post-stimulus, pkaC null cells display considerably elevated and
extended HM phosphorylation in PKB and PKBR1 (Fig. 3F).
Similarly, we observed that the TORC2-mediated phosphorylation
of the PKB and PKBR1 HMs is elevated in cells that lacked ACA, as
well as in cells that had been treated with the PKA-selective
pharmacological inhibitor H89 (Fig. 3F; Fig. S2) (Zeng et al.,
2001). Hence, these results suggest that loss of PKA function leads
to an increased activation of TORC2. Taken together, our

Journal of Cell Science

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Journal of Cell Science (2017) 130, 1545-1558 doi:10.1242/jcs.177170

Fig. 3. Activity of chemotactic effectors PKB, PKBR1, PI3K and TORC2 in cells lacking PKA function. (A) cAMP-induced PKB and PKBR1 kinase activity in
wild-type (WT) and pkaC null ( pkaC—) cells, and in cells lacking adenylyl cyclase A (acaA—). The kinase activity of immunopurified PKB and PKBR1 was
assessed using H2B as a substrate. H2B phosphorylation was detected by autoradiography, and PKB and PKBR1 were revealed by immunoblotting. (B) cAMPinduced phosphorylation of PKB and PKBR1 substrates was detected using an antibody against PKB-phosphorylated substrates (P-PKBS). (C) Localization of
the PI(3,4,5)P3 reporter PHcrac–GFP in developed resting cells. (D) Live imaging of PHcrac–GFP in cells exposed to an exponential gradient of cAMP. The
direction of the gradient is indicated by the arrow. (E) Live imaging of PHcrac–GFP in cells that had been uniformly stimulated with 5 μM cAMP for the indicated
times, and relative cytosolic fluorescence intensity of PHcrac–GFP measured in cells that had been uniformly stimulated with cAMP. Graph data represent the
mean fluorescence intensity±s.e.m. of 20 WT and 26 pkaC null cells, expressed as a fold over the basal level. (F) TORC2-mediated phosphorylation of PKB and
PKBR1 at their respective hydrophobic motifs (HMP) was assessed in WT, pkaC— and acaA— cells, and in WT cells treated with the PKA pharmacological inhibitor
H89 or the vehicle (DMSO). CB, Coomassie blue staining. Scale bars: 10 μm. Data are representative of at least three independent experiments.

observations indicate that the elevated PKB and PKBR1 activity
levels in cells that lack PKA function are likely to result from
the combination of upregulated PI3K and TORC2 pathways in
these cells.

Lack of PKA function has different effects on RasC, RasG and
Rap1

In Dictyostelium, the Ras protein RasG is the main mediator of PI3K
activation in response to cAMP stimulation (Bolourani et al., 2006;
1549

Journal of Cell Science

RESEARCH ARTICLE

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Sasaki et al., 2004), RasC is the main activator of TORC2 (Cai et al.,
2010; Charest et al., 2010), and Rap1 has been shown to regulate the
activity of both PI3K and TORC2 (Khanna et al., 2016; Kortholt
et al., 2010) in addition to other Rap1 effectors. To then investigate
potential mechanisms underlying the elevated activity levels of
TORC2 and PI3K in cells that lack PKA function, we examined the
activity of RasC, RasG and Rap1 under such conditions. First, we
assessed the activity of Flag-tagged RasC in pkaC null cells and in
wild-type cells treated with H89. Interestingly, we observed that
cAMP-induced RasC activation is considerably decreased in cells
lacking PKA activity (Fig. 4A). We also found that Sca1 fails to
translocate from the cytosol to the plasma membrane in pkaC null
cells that had been stimulated with cAMP and that Sca1
translocation is considerably reduced in acaA null cells compared
to that in wild-type cells (Fig. 4B,C). These observations are
consistent with our previous findings that phosphorylation of Sca1
mediated by PKB kinases is elevated in pkaC null cells and that this
phosphorylation inhibits the translocation of the Sca1 complex to
the plasma membrane and RasC activation (Charest et al., 2010).
These results show that RasC activity is downregulated in cells that
lack PKA function and, therefore, suggest that PKA is necessary for
optimal RasC activation. Consequently, this PKA-mediated
positive regulation of RasC cannot explain the elevated TORC2
activity observed in pkaC null cells.
In contrast to the decrease in RasC activation observed in cells
that lack PKA activity, we found that both RasG and Rap1 display

Journal of Cell Science (2017) 130, 1545-1558 doi:10.1242/jcs.177170

elevated basal activity levels, and elevated and extended cAMPinduced activation, in pkaC null cells compared to those in wildtype cells (Fig. 5A). To image RasG activity dynamics, we used the
Ras activity reporter that comprises the Ras-binding domain (RBD)
of human Raf1 fused to GFP [Raf1(RBD)–GFP], which binds to
RasG and not to RasC (Kae et al., 2004; Kortholt et al., 2013; Sasaki
et al., 2004). Although Raf1(RBD)–GFP also binds to the active
forms of Dictyostelium RasB and RasD (Zhang et al., 2008), RasG
is believed to be the predominant Ras protein expressed in cAMPresponsive aggregation-stage Dictyostelium cells (at 5–8 h after
onset of development) (Rot et al., 2009), and thus Raf1(RBD)–GFP
is believed to be a good reporter of active RasG. Raf1(RBD)–GFP is
mostly found in the cytosol of resting wild-type cells, whereas many
resting pkaC null cells display cortex-localized Raf1(RBD)–GFP –
at membrane protrusions, membrane ruffles and endocytic cups –
which is similar to the observed localization of both the F-actin and
PI(3,4,5)P3 reporters in these cells (Fig. 5B). Also reminiscent of
the observed F-actin and PI(3,4,5)P3 dynamics in pkaC null cells,
Raf1(RBD)–GFP is highly enriched in the randomly extended
membrane protrusions of pkaC null cells exposed to a cAMP
gradient (Fig. 5C). Consistent with the profile of the PI(3,4,5)P3
response, which lies downstream from RasG, the Ras activity
reporter exhibits a reduced translocation to the cell cortex in pkaC
null cells upon uniform cAMP stimulation compared to that in wildtype cells, when normalized to their respective basal levels (Fig. 5D;
Movies 9 and 10).

Journal of Cell Science

Fig. 4. RasC pathway activation in cells
lacking PKA function. (A) cAMP-induced
activation of Flag-tagged RasC expressed
in wild-type (WT) and pkaC null ( pkaC—)
cells, and in WT cells treated with the PKA
pharmacological inhibitor H89 or the
vehicle (DMSO). Active RasC (RasC–
GTP) was pulled down with GST–Byr2
(RBD). RasC–GTP and total RasC were
revealed by immunoblotting for Flag.
(B) Live imaging of GFP–Sca1 in cells that
had been uniformly stimulated with 5 μM
cAMP for the indicated times. Scale bars:
10 μm. (C) Relative cytosolic fluorescence
intensity of GFP–Sca1 in cells that had
been uniformly stimulated with cAMP. Data
represent the mean fluorescence
intensity±s.e.m. of 150 WT, 33 pkaC null
cells and 147 acaA null cells. Data
represent or are representative of at least
three independent experiments.

1550

Journal of Cell Science (2017) 130, 1545-1558 doi:10.1242/jcs.177170

Fig. 5. Spatiotemporal dynamics of RasG and Rap1 activities in pkaC null cells. (A) cAMP-induced RasG and Rap1 activation. Active RasG (Ras–GTP) and
Rap1 (Rap1–GTP) were pulled down with GST–Raf1(RBD) and GST–RalGDS(RBD), respectively, and revealed by immunoblotting for pan-Ras and Rap1.
(B,E) Localization of Raf1(RBD)–GFP (B) and RalGDS(RBD)–GFP (E) in resting cells. (C,F) Live imaging of Raf1(RBD)–GFP (C) and RalGDS(RBD)–GFP (F) in
cells that had been exposed to an exponential gradient of cAMP. (D,G) Live imaging of Raf1(RBD)–GFP (D) and RalGDS(RBD)–GFP (G) in cells that had been
uniformly stimulated with 5 μM cAMP for the indicated times. Relative reporter cytosolic fluorescence intensity is shown on the right, expressed as a fold over the
basal level. Scale bars: 10 μm. Quantified data represent the mean fluorescence intensity±s.e.m. of 20 Raf1(RBD)–GFP-expressing WT cells, nine Raf1(RBD)–
GFP-expressing pkaC null cells, 109 RalGDS(RBD)–GFP-expressing WT cells and 135 RalGDS(RBD)–GFP-expressing pkaC null cells. Data represent or are
representative of at least three independent experiments.

To image Rap1 activity dynamics, we used the Rap1 activity
reporter comprising the RBD of human RalGDS [RalGDS(RBD)–
GFP] (Jeon et al., 2007b). In resting cells, although some pkaC null
cells are found with slightly more RalGDS(RBD)–GFP localized to

the membrane, for the most part, RalGDS(RBD)–GFP displays
localization patterns more similar to those in wild-type cells
(Fig. 5E). However, RalGDS(RBD)–GFP is clearly enriched in the
randomly extended membrane protrusions of pkaC null cells
1551

Journal of Cell Science

RESEARCH ARTICLE

exposed to a cAMP gradient (Fig. 5F). In addition, the Rap1 activity
reporter displays increased translocation to and prolonged
localization at the cell cortex in pkaC null cells in response to
uniform cAMP stimulation compared to that in wild-type cells
(Fig. 5G; Movies 11 and 12). Therefore, together, our observations
suggest that, in contrast to the PKA-dependent positive regulation of
RasC, PKA has a negative regulatory effect on RasG and Rap1
activation.
pkaC null cells have severe gradient-sensing defects

Spatiotemporal regulation of RasG activity is required for directional
sensing of cAMP gradients in Dictyostelium (Zhang et al., 2008). Our
findings that pkaC null cells are motile but fail to migrate along a
cAMP gradient and that RasG activity is upregulated in the absence
of PKA suggest that PKA may be necessary for gradient sensing. To
test whether PKA plays a role in cAMP gradient sensing, we assessed
the Ras response, using Raf1(RBD)–GFP, in cells that had been
treated with the F-actin inhibitor Latrunculin B (LatB). LatB
treatment generates cells that are unable to polymerize F-actin and
are, thus, paralyzed, symmetrical and spherical (Parent et al., 1998).
LatB-treated cells can then be used to interrogate cAMP gradientsensing capabilities in the absence of feedback from the actin
cytoskeleton (Zhang et al., 2008). As previously reported (Zhang
et al., 2008), LatB-treated wild-type cells respond to the cAMP
gradient and accumulate Raf1(RBD)–GFP in the form of a crescent at
the cell cortex on the side closest to the chemoattractant source, a
cAMP-filled micropipette (Fig. 6A). Upon repositioning of the
micropipette to the opposite side of the cell, Raf1(RBD)–GFP is
quickly delocalized from its previous site and accumulates at the
cortex on the side closest to the new position of the micropipette
within 10-15 s, reflecting the rapid deactivation and activation of Ras
at each site, respectively (Fig. 6A,B; Movie 13). In wild-type cells,
Raf1(RBD)–GFP accumulation is highly restricted to the side closest
to the cAMP chemoattractant source and never accumulates at the
side opposite to the micropipette or the lateral sides, illustrating the
highly spatially regulated Ras response.
In contrast to the rapid and restricted accumulation of Raf1
(RBD)–GFP at the cell cortex of LatB-treated wild-type cells upon
cAMP gradient sensing, accumulation of the Ras reporter to the
cortex of LatB-treated pkaC null cells does not as strongly correlate
with the position of the chemoattractant source (Fig. 6; Movies 14
and 15). In pkaC null cells, accumulation of Raf1(RBD)–GFP on
the side of the cell closest to the chemoattractant does become
enriched, but with very slow kinetics (∼ 1 min) compared to that for
wild-type cells (within 15 s), and localization of the reporter is not
restricted there. Raf1(RBD)–GFP is often observed to be located at
the lateral sides and even sometimes on the opposite side from that
facing the micropipette, which is never observed for wild-type cells.
In pkaC null cells, the Ras reporter appears to be moving around the
cell cortex as if the Ras signal is propagating, reminiscent of the
previously reported self-organized waves of PI(3,4,5)P3 that are
generated spontaneously on the membrane in the absence of the
chemoattractant (Arai et al., 2010). These observations suggest that,
although pkaC null cells respond to the cAMP gradient, PKA is
necessary for cells to properly restrict Ras activation to the side
closest to the chemoattractant source, which is likely to underlie the
inability of cells that lack PKA to accurately determine the direction
of the gradient during the chemotaxis response to cAMP.
cAR1 expression in pkaC null cells

Our results using the pkaC null cells as well as acaA null cells and
the H89 inhibitor suggest a role for PKA in regulating the Ras and
1552

Journal of Cell Science (2017) 130, 1545-1558 doi:10.1242/jcs.177170

Rap1 pathways in response to the cAMP chemoattractant in
Dictyostelium. However, it is also possible that some of the
observed effects associated with the lack of PKA are indirect and
due to its role in controlling gene expression. We determined that, at
least, Ras, Rap1, Pia (an essential TORC2 component), PKB and
PKBR1 are well expressed in pkaC null cells (Fig. 7A; Fig. S3).
Interestingly, as previously reported for wild-type cells (Stajdohar
et al., 2015), the observed regulated decrease in PKB expression in
5.5-h cAMP-pulsed cells indicate that some developmental gene
expression is properly conserved in pkaC null cells (Fig. 7A). By
contrast, we failed to detect the expression of the cAMP chemotactic
receptor cAR1 (also known as carA) by immunoblotting. However,
the fact that pkaC null cells respond well to cAMP stimulation,
whereas cells lacking cAR1 (carA null cells) mostly don’t, suggests
that some cAR1 is likely to be present in pkaC null cells (Fig. 7D,E)
(Liao et al., 2013). In order to test whether the shortage of cAR1
expression in pkaC null cells is responsible for the pkaC null
phenotypes, we assessed the ability of exogenously expressed
cAR1–GFP to rescue the chemotaxis, RasG, Rap1 and TORC2
activity defects of pkaC null cells. We found that, at similar cAR1–
GFP expression levels in carA null and pkaC null cells, cAR1–GFP
rescued the ability of carA null cells to undergo chemotaxis and
only very partially rescued the chemotactic defects of pkaC null
cells (Fig. 7C; Movies 16 and 17). Indeed, some of the cAR1–GFPexpressing pkaC null cells closest to the chemoattractant source did
find the way to the tip of the micropipette, albeit inefficiently.
Nonetheless, this result suggests that part of the chemotaxis
phenotype of pkaC null cells is due to lack of cAR1 expression.
We next assessed the cAMP-induced activation of RasG, Rap1
and TORC2 in carA null cells compared to those in pkaC null cells,
and tested the effect of expressing exogenous cAR1–GFP at similar
levels in both strains, as controlled by immunoblot and fluorescence
measurements. As previously reported (Kae et al., 2004), the basal
level of Ras activity, as well as that of Rap1 activity, is elevated in
carA null cells and, by contrast with the pkaC null cells, the carA
null cells fail to respond to a cAMP stimulus by further increasing
the activity of RasG and Rap1 (Fig. 7D). In addition, although the
cAMP-induced TORC2-mediated phosphorylation of PKB and
PKBR1 is elevated and prolonged in pkaC null cells, cAMP
stimulation produces minimal TORC2 activation in carA null cells
(Fig. 7E), which is likely to be mediated by the cAMP receptor 3,
which is expressed at low levels in aggregation-competent cells
(Insall et al., 1994). As expected, cAR1–GFP expression in carA
null cells rescued the cAMP-induced activation of Ras, Rap1 and
TORC2 in this strain (Fig. 7D,E). Interestingly, pkaC null cells
expressing cAR1–GFP, at levels similar to those rescuing the carA
null cell phenotypes, displayed the same elevated and extended
cAMP-induced RasG, Rap1 and PKB and PKBR1 phosphorylation
responses as in pkaC null cells (Fig. 7D,E). Taken together, these
observations suggest that (i) some cAR1 is expressed in pkaC null
cells; (ii) little cAR1 is sufficient to fully activate the RasG, Rap1
and TORC2 pathways, whereas high levels of cAR1 are necessary
for chemotaxis; and finally, (iii) the lack of cAR1 is not responsible
for the observed upregulated signaling pathways in pkaC null cells.
DISCUSSION

It is widely appreciated that specific kinetics and localization of
chemotactic signaling pathways, as well as their adaptation to the
chemoattractant signal, are required for the directional response of
cells to chemoattractant gradients. However, how chemoattractant
signaling is regulated and how signaling pathway dynamics and
polarity are achieved is not understood. Our study suggests that PKA

Journal of Cell Science

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Journal of Cell Science (2017) 130, 1545-1558 doi:10.1242/jcs.177170

Fig. 6. Gradient sensing in pkaC null cells. (A) Live imaging of Raf1(RBD)–GFP in cells, treated with 10 μM LatB, upon changes of cAMP gradient orientation.
Two examples of pkaC null cells are shown (cell 1 and cell 2). Data are representative of at least three independent experiments. * indicates the position of
the cAMP-filled micropipette. Scale bars: 10 μm. (B) Quantification of the relative fluorescence intensity of membrane-localized Raf1(RBD)–GFP in cells shown
in A, for the sides alternatively closest and opposite to the positioned micropipette (sides A and B; top graphs) and the lateral sides (sides 1 and 2; bottom graphs),
as indicated in the graph key.

is essential to chemotaxis and plays an important role in the control of
both the localized activation and adaptation of key cAMP-induced
chemotactic signaling pathways in Dictyostelium, involving RasG,
Rap1, PI3K, TORC2, PKB and PKBR1, as well as the spatiotemporal

regulation of the cytoskeleton (Fig. 8). The observed effect of lack of
PKA function on chemotaxis is likely to result from a combination of
roles in gene regulation and signaling. Indeed, although it is hard to
separate these two cellular functions of PKA, our experiments using
1553

Journal of Cell Science

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Journal of Cell Science (2017) 130, 1545-1558 doi:10.1242/jcs.177170

Fig. 7. The expression of cAR1 and its role in RasG, Rap1 and TORC2 activation in pkaC null cells. (A) Expression of cAR1, Ras, Rap1, Pia, PKB and
PKBR1 in wild-type (WT) and pkaC null ( pkaC—) vegetative cells (0 h) and in cells pulsed with cAMP for 5.5 h, detected by immunoblotting using protein-specific
antibodies. (B) cAR1–GFP expression in carA and pkaC null cells, revealed by GFP immunoblotting. (C) Chemotaxis phenotype of cAR1–GFP-expressing
carA and pkaC null cells migrating in an exponential cAMP gradient created by a point source. Differential interference contrast (DIC) and fluorescence (GFP)
images showing expressed cAR1–GFP are shown. (Right) Traces of the migration path for a subset of the migrating cells. *, position of the cAMP-filled
micropipette. Scale bars: 50 μm. (D) cAMP-induced RasG and Rap1 activation. Active RasG (Ras–GTP) and Rap1 (Rap1–GTP) were pulled down with GST–
Raf1(RBD) and GST–RalGDS(RBD), respectively, and revealed by immunoblotting for pan-Ras and Rap1. (E) cAMP-induced phosphorylation of the
hydrophobic motif (HMP; TORC2 site) of PKB and PKBR1. CB, Coomassie Blue staining. Data are representative of at least three independent experiments.

acaA null cells – which produce a lot less cAMP and, thereby, have
little PKA activity (Meima and Schaap, 1999) – as well as our results
with the PKA-selective pharmacological inhibitor H89, strongly
1554

suggest that PKA plays a signaling role in controlling the chemotactic
pathways in Dictyostelium. Although we found that pkaC null cells
lack detectable cAR1 expression, as assessed by immunoblotting,

Journal of Cell Science

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Fig. 8. Proposed model for the role of PKA in regulating the
chemoattractant signal transduction pathways in Dictyostelium. Although
PKA controls gene expression during development, including that of cAR1,
and this probably explains part of the observed severe chemotaxis phenotypes
of pkaC null cells, our study suggests that PKA is also likely to play a direct role
in controlling the directional migration of cells. In light of our findings, we
propose that PKA controls chemotaxis, in part, by spatially and temporally
regulating the activation of RasG, Rap1 and TORC2.

they are responsive to cAMP stimulation, which suggests that some
cAR1 is present. Interestingly, vegetative cells, which express little
cAR1, also produce a full cAMP-induced TORC2 activation response
(Liao et al., 2013). This previous observation and our present study
suggest that only small amounts of cAR1 are necessary to activate, at
least some, cAMP-induced signaling pathways, whereas more cAR1
is necessary for efficient chemotaxis towards cAMP. In fact, the
partial rescue of chemotaxis of pkaC null cells by the exogenous
expression of cAR1 suggests that lack of cAR1 is partly responsible
for the chemotaxis phenotype of these cells. However, we found that
lack of cAR1 expression in pkaC null cells is not responsible for the
upregulated cAMP signaling pathways in these cells.
Consistent with a role for cAMP in the spatiotemporal control of
signaling pathways, acaA null cells are unable to suppress the
formation of lateral pseudopods, leading to directionality defects
during chemotaxis (Stepanovic et al., 2005). We propose that this
intracellular role of ACA and cAMP in Dictyostelium is mediated, in
part, by the PKA-dependent regulation of the RasG and Rap1
pathways in space and time during chemotaxis. In addition, as the
PI3K, TORC2, PKB and PKBR1 signaling pathways contribute to
the cAMP-stimulated activation of ACA and cAMP production
(Charest et al., 2010; Comer and Parent, 2006; Lee et al., 2005; Lim
et al., 2001) and, consequently, to the downstream activation of
PKA, we further propose that PKA indirectly controls its own level
of activity during chemotaxis in a negative-feedback fashion. This
hypothesis is consistent with previous observations that cAMPstimulated ACA activity fails to adapt in ACA-expressing pkaC null

Journal of Cell Science (2017) 130, 1545-1558 doi:10.1242/jcs.177170

cells (Mann et al., 1997) and that cells with elevated PKA activity
display reduced intracellular levels of cAMP compared to those in
wild-type cells (Abe and Yanagisawa, 1983; Anjard et al., 1992).
Our analysis of the chemotaxis and cAMP gradient-sensing
phenotypes of pkaC null cells suggests that PKA is not necessary for
basic cell motility in Dictyostelium but that it is crucial to cAMP
chemotaxis and plays a key role in restricting the extent, as well as the
site, of chemotactic pathway activation and, thereby, pseudopod
protrusion. Our finding that PKA is essential to cAMP chemotaxis is
surprising because, although pkaC null cells are unable to aggregate
by themselves with or without the ability to produce cAMP (Mann
et al., 1997), they have been found to co-aggregate with wild-type
cells (Mann and Firtel, 1991). We propose that, in such cases, cell–
cell contacts between pkaC null and wild-type cells may have
enabled their co-aggregation. By contrast, the chemotaxis phenotype
of pkaC null cells is consistent with the considerable reduction in
chemotaxis observed for cells with decreased PKA activity due to
the expression of PKA regulatory subunit (PKA-R) mutants
(Harwood et al., 1992). Intriguingly, cells that lack the PKA-R, in
which PKA-C is constitutively active, also display reduced polarity,
reduced directionality, the inability to repress the formation of lateral
pseudopods and, consequently, severely impaired chemotaxis to
cAMP (Zhang et al., 2003). However, given the promiscuous nature
of PKA, whose specificity is normally tightly regulated through
anchoring complexes (Greenwald and Saucerman, 2011; Pidoux and
Taskén, 2010), careful consideration must be given to the phenotype
of cells with constitutive PKA activity. Nonetheless, the similarity of
pkaC and pkaR null cell phenotypes could support the idea of an
auto-regulatory circuit, which is linked by feedback loops that
function to tightly regulate PKA activity during chemotaxis, such as
that previously proposed by Soll and colleagues (Stepanovic et al.,
2005). Disruption of any one component of such a circuit destroys
the circuit, and is likely to yield a common phenotype that reflects the
role of the circuit. In the case of cAMP–PKA signaling, we propose
that the wiring of this circuit allows the coordinated control of
directional pseudopod extension and signal relay (Fig. 8).
The cAMP chemotaxis phenotype of pkaC null cells is also highly
reminiscent of cells that lack the RasG GAP DdNF1 (nfaA null cells),
which exhibit elevated levels of chemoattractant-induced RasG
activity (Zhang et al., 2008), as well as of cells expressing a
constitutively active Rap1 mutant (Rap1G12V; Jeon et al.,
2007a). nfaA null cells display increased phagocytosis and
macropinocytosis, are motile but fail to properly sense cAMP
gradients, and extend multiple lateral pseudopods leading to severe
chemotaxis defects (Bloomfield et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2008).
Rap1G12V-expressing cells also produce lateral pseudopods during
migration, and undergo chemotaxis towards cAMP with little
directionality (Jeon et al., 2007a). Consequently, we propose that
the elevated and spatially misregulated RasG and Rap1 activities in
pkaC null cells underlie the inability of these cells to properly sense
gradients, to define a leading front and to migrate along a cAMP
gradient. Hence, we suggest that PKA regulates the cAMP gradientsensing abilities of cells mainly by controlling RasG and Rap1
activation. The PKA-mediated regulation of RasG and Rap1 can
explain, at least in part, the effects of PKA on the downstream
activation of PI3K, TORC2, PKB and PKBR1, as well as F-actin
polymerization and MyoII assembly (Fig. 8). Indeed, both RasG and
Rap1 mediate PI3K activation, which, in turn, promotes F-actin
polymerization, and Rap1 regulates TORC2, as well as MyoII
assembly through a parallel pathway involving its effector Phg2
(Khanna et al., 2016; Kortholt et al., 2010; Swaney et al., 2010).
Similar to pkaC null cells, cells with elevated RasG activity display
1555

Journal of Cell Science

RESEARCH ARTICLE

RESEARCH ARTICLE

elevated PI3K activity and F-actin dynamics (Zhang et al., 2008), and
cells with elevated Rap1 activity exhibit elevated TORC2 activity and
reduced MyoII assembly (Jeon et al., 2007a; Khanna et al., 2016). Of
course, we cannot exclude the possibility that PKA directly regulates
PI3K, PKB and PKBR1, F-actin and MyoII, in addition to RasG,
Rap1 and TORC2, and that PKA may have additional roles in
chemotaxis to cAMP, such as in regulating Rac GTPases and various
actin modulators (Howe, 2004).
In addition to the PKA-dependent regulation of Rap1, which is
likely to affect downstream TORC2 activity, we propose that TORC2
is also regulated by PKA independently of Rap1. We have recently
shown that RasC is essential for TORC2 activation while Rap1
regulates the RasC-mediated TORC2 activity (Khanna et al., 2016).
Since RasC activity in cells that lack PKA is strongly reduced, we
propose that the highly elevated TORC2 activity in cells that lack
PKA results from the PKA-dependent regulation of both Rap1 and
TORC2. In mammalian cells, PKA has been found to associate with
mTOR (Mavrakis et al., 2006) and to mediate inhibition of both
mTORC1 and mTORC2 by inducing dissociation of the complexes
(Xie et al., 2011). However, whether PKA directly phosphorylates
mTOR or components of mTOR complexes is unknown. By contrast,
the observed PKA-dependent positive regulation of RasC is likely to
be indirect and to result from the PKA-dependent inhibition of
TORC2, as well as of RasG, Rap1 and PI3K signaling, leading to
reduced PKB and PKBR1 activity. This reduced activity of PKB and
PKBR1, which normally inhibit the Sca1 complex-mediated RasC
activation through a negative-feedback loop (Charest et al., 2010),
will consequently lead to greater RasC activation (Fig. 8).
In mammalian cells, including neutrophils, PKA activity has been
shown to be enriched at the front of migrating cells and to promote
actin cytoskeleton polarization (Jones and Sharief, 2005; PaulucciHolthauzen et al., 2009). One of the suggested mechanisms through
which PKA controls mammalian cell migration involves its direct
phosphorylation of Rap1, thereby controlling Rap1 membrane
localization and activity cycle (Takahashi et al., 2013). Whether this
is the mechanism through which PKA controls Rap1 (and/or RasG)
activity in Dictyostelium remains to be determined, but this is certainly
a possibility. It is also conceivable that PKA targets specific RasG and
Rap1 GEFs and/or GAPs, instead of or in addition to directly targeting
the GTPases. In any case, our findings highlight a previously
unappreciated role of PKA in chemotaxis, through the spatial and
temporal regulation of key chemotactic signaling pathways.
MATERIALS AND METHODS

Journal of Cell Science (2017) 130, 1545-1558 doi:10.1242/jcs.177170

et al., 1999; Sasaki et al., 2004). The cAR1 antibody was a generous gift
from Peter Devreotes (Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD) and is described
elsewhere (Hereld et al., 1994). Raf1(RBD)–GFP and RalGDS(RBD)–GFP
constructs were kindly provided by Arjan Kortholt (University of
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands) and have been previously described
(Kortholt et al., 2010, 2013). GFP–Sca1 has been described previously
(Charest et al., 2010). Flag-tagged RasC was generated by fusing the Flag
tag nucleotide sequence, GATTATAAAGATGATGATGATAAA, in frame
at the N-terminus of the RasC sequence and cloned into the extrachromosomal vector pDM304, obtained through the Dicty Stock Center,
deposited by Douwe Veltman (Veltman et al., 2009). cAR1–GFP was
generated by cloning cAR1 into the GFP-containing extra-chromosomal
vector pDM323 (Veltman et al., 2009) and was a gift from Chris
Janetopoulos (University of the Sciences, Philadelphia, PA).
Cell culture and strains used

Dictyostelium cells were grown attached to substrate in axenic HL5 medium
(ForMedium, Hunstanton, Norfolk, UK) at 22°C, and transformants were
generated by electroporation. Transformed cells were selected in 10 or
20 µg/ml geneticin, or 50 µg/ml hygromycin B (both from Life
Technologies), and expression was confirmed by western blotting. Cells
were developed by pulsing with 30 nM cAMP every 6 min for 5.5 h in
12 mM Na2HPO4 and KH2PO4 buffer, pH 6.1, at a confluence of 5×106 cells/
ml for wild-type cells and at 7×106 cells/ml for pkaC null cells, which are
much smaller, in order to have equivalent densities. The wild-type cells used
were AX2 and AX3, depending on the background of mutant used. ScaA null
cells are described elsewhere (Charest et al., 2010). pkaC null and acaA null
cells were obtained from the Dicty Stock Center, where they were deposited
by Rick Firtel and Bill Loomis, respectively; both strains are described
elsewhere (Mann and Firtel, 1991; Mann et al., 1992; Stepanovic et al.,
2005). The HBW1 and HBW2 cells were a kind gift from Robert Kay (MRC
Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK) and have been described
previously (Primpke et al., 2000). The carA null cells (AX2 background)
were generously provided by Alan Kimmel (NIH-NIDDK, Bethesda, MD)
and have been previously described (Sun and Devreotes, 1991).
Biochemical assays

F-actin measurements using phalloidin staining, PKB and PKBR1 kinase
assays, and Ras–GTP and Rap1–GTP pulldown assays were performed as
previously described (Insall et al., 1996; Jeon et al., 2007a; Meili et al., 1999;
Sasaki et al., 2004, 2007; Zhang et al., 2008). TORC2 activity was assessed by
evaluating the TORC2-mediated phosphorylation of PKB and PKBR1, as
described previously (Kamimura et al., 2009). Detection of phosphorylated
PKB and PKA substrates by western blotting, using the antibodies described
above, was performed on whole cell lysates according to the manufacturers’
protocols. For H89 treatments, cells that had been pulsed with cAMP for 5.5 h
as described above were treated either with 5% DMSO (control) or 50 µM of
DMSO-dissolved H89 for 30 min before cAMP stimulation.

Reagents

1556

Chemotaxis and imaging

Assessment of chemotaxis, gradient sensing, global responses of fluorescent
reporters to cAMP stimulation, and image acquisition were performed as
previously described (Charest et al., 2010; Chung and Firtel, 1999; Sasaki
et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2008). Chemotaxis parameters were determined as
described previously (Cai et al., 2010). Images were acquired using a
Marianas spinning disk confocal workstation (Intelligent Imaging
Innovations, Inc., Denver, CO) equipped with an Evolve™ 512 EMCCD
camera (Photometrics, Tucson, AZ), and image analysis was performed
using the Slidebook software (Intelligent Imaging Innovations, Inc.,
Denver, CO). Analysis of fluorescent reporter translocations between the
cytosol and the cell cortex was performed by measuring changes in
fluorescence intensities in the cytosol as described previously (Takeda et al.,
2012), normalized to basal levels in each cell.
Acknowledgements
We thank Rick Firtel, Arjan Kortholt, Peter Devreotes, Alan Kimmel and Chris
Janetopoulos, as well as the Dicty Stock Center for providing reagents.

Journal of Cell Science

cAMP sodium salt monohydrate and anti-Flag M2 were from SigmaAldrich, and H2B was from Roche-Genentech. Antibodies against
phosphorylated p70 S6 kinase (Thr389; clone 1A5; 1:1000; used to detect
PKB and PKBR1 HM phosphorylation), phosphorylated Akt substrates
(clone 110B7; 1:1000) and phosphorylated (Ser/Thr) PKA substrates were
from Cell Signaling Technology. A pan-Ras antibody (Ab-3; clone RAS10;
1:500) was from Calbiochem – EMD Millipore. H89 and DyLightTM
secondary antibodies were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. The
Living Colors® GFP monoclonal antibody was purchased from Clontech
(now Takara Bio USA Inc.). Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated
secondary antibodies were purchased from Jackson ImmunoResearch
Laboratories. The Rap1 (directed against amino acids 169-182 of
Dictyostelium Rap1) and Pia antibodies (directed against amino acids
138-159 of Dictyostelium Pianissimo) were custom-made by ProSci
Incorporated (Poway, CA, USA). Antibodies against PKB and PKBR1,
and Lifeact-GFP, GFP–MyoII and PHcrac–GFP constructs were gifts from
Rick Firtel (University of California–San Diego, La Jolla, CA) and have
been previously described (Bastounis et al., 2011; Jeon et al., 2007a; Meili

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.

Author contributions
M.S. and A.R.P. contributed equally to the work; P.G.C. conceptualized and
designed the study; M.S., A.R.P., R.R., V.F.T., P.L. and P.G.C. performed and
interpreted the experiments; M.S., A.R.P. and P.G.C. prepared the manuscript.

Funding
M.S. was supported by National Institutes of Health T32 grant GM008804; and P.L.
was supported by a U.S. Public Health Service grant GM037830. The work was
supported by a Research Scholar Grant 127940-RSG-15-024-01-CSM from the
American Cancer Society to P.G.C. Deposited in PMC for release after 12 months.

Supplementary information
Supplementary information available online at
http://jcs.biologists.org/lookup/doi/10.1242/jcs.177170.supplemental

References
Abe, K. and Yanagisawa, K. (1983). A new class of rapidly developing mutants in
Dictyostelium discoideum: implications for cyclic AMP metabolism and cell
differentiation. Dev. Biol. 95, 200-210.
Afonso, P. V., Janka-Junttila, M., Lee, Y. J., McCann, C. P., Oliver, C. M., Aamer,
K. A., Losert, W., Cicerone, M. T. and Parent, C. A. (2012). LTB(4) is a signalrelay molecule during neutrophil chemotaxis. Dev. Cell 22, 1079-1091.
Anjard, C., Pinaud, S., Kay, R. R. and Reymond, C. D. (1992). Overexpression of
Dd PK2 protein kinase causes rapid development and affects the intracellular
cAMP pathway of Dictyostelium discoideum. Development 115, 785-790.
Arai, Y., Shibata, T., Matsuoka, S., Sato, M. J., Yanagida, T. and Ueda, M. (2010).
Self-organization of the phosphatidylinositol lipids signaling system for random
cell migration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 12399-12404.
Artemenko, Y., Lampert, T. J. and Devreotes, P. N. (2014). Moving towards a
paradigm: common mechanisms of chemotactic signaling in Dictyostelium and
mammalian leukocytes. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 71, 3711-3747.
Bagorda, A., Das, S., Rericha, E. C., Chen, D., Davidson, J. and Parent, C. A.
(2009). Real-time measurements of cAMP production in live Dictyostelium cells.
J. Cell Sci. 122, 3907-3914.
Bastounis, E., Meili, R., Alonso-Latorre, B., del Alamo, J. C., Lasheras, J. C. and
Firtel, R. A. (2011). The SCAR/WAVE complex is necessary for proper regulation
of traction stresses during amoeboid motility. Mol. Biol. Cell 22, 3995-4003.
Bloomfield, G., Traynor, D., Sander, S. P., Veltman, D. M., Pachebat, J. A. and
Kay, R. R. (2015). Neurofibromin controls macropinocitosis and phagocytosis in
Dictyostelium. Elife 4, e04940.
Bolourani, P., Spiegelman, G. B. and Weeks, G. (2006). Delineation of the roles
played by RasG and RasC in cAMP-dependent signal transduction during the
early development of Dictyostelium discoideum. Mol. Biol. Cell 17, 4543-4550.
Bravo-Cordero, J. J., Hodgson, L. and Condeelis, J. (2012). Directed cell
invasion and migration during metastasis. Curr. Opin. Cell. Biol. 24, 277-283.
Cai, H., Das, S., Kamimura, Y., Long, Y., Parent, C. A. and Devreotes, P. N.
(2010). Ras-mediated activation of the TORC2-PKB pathway is critical for
chemotaxis. J. Cell Biol. 190, 233-245.
Chang, H. and Levchenko, A. (2013). Adaptive molecular networks controlling
chemotactic migration: dynamic inputs and selection of the network architecture.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 368, 20130117.
Charest, P. G. and Firtel, R. A. (2006). Feedback signaling controls leading-edge
formation during chemotaxis. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 16, 339-347.
Charest, P. G. and Firtel, R. A. (2007). Big roles for small GTPases in the control of
directed cell movement. Biochem. J. 401, 377-390.
Charest, P. G., Shen, Z., Lakoduk, A., Sasaki, A. T., Briggs, S. P. and Firtel, R. A.
(2010). A Ras signaling complex controls the RasC-TORC2 pathway and directed
cell migration. Dev. Cell 18, 737-749.
Chen, Y., Wang, Y., Yu, H. and Xu, W. (2005). The cross talk between protein kinase
A- and RhoA-mediated signaling in cancer cells. Exp. Biol. Med. 10, 731-741.
Chung, C. Y. and Firtel, R. A. (1999). PAKa, a putative PAK family member, is
required for cytokinesis and the regulation of the cytoskeleton in Dictyostelium
discoideum cells during chemotaxis. J. Cell Biol. 147, 559-576.
Comer, F. I. and Parent, C. A. (2006). Phosphoinositide 3-kinase activity controls
the chemoattractant-mediated activation and adaptation of adenylyl cyclase. Mol.
Biol. Cell 17, 357-366.
Dormann, D., Weijer, G., Parent, C. A., Devreotes, P. N. and Weijer, C. J. (2002).
Visualizing PI3 kinase-mediated cell-cell signaling during Dictyostelium
development. Curr. Biol. 12, 1178-1188.
Garcia, G. L. and Parent, C. A. (2008). Signal relay during chemotaxis. J. Microsc.
231, 529-534.
Greenwald, E. C. and Saucerman, J. J. (2011). Bigger, better, faster: principles
and models of AKAP anchoring protein signaling. J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol. 58,
462-469.

Journal of Cell Science (2017) 130, 1545-1558 doi:10.1242/jcs.177170

Hall, A., Warren, V., Dharmawardhane, S. and Condeelis, J. (1989). Identification
of actin nucleation activity and polymerization inhibitor in amoeboid cells: Their
regulation by chemotactic stimulation. J. Cell. Biol. 109, 2207-2213.
Harwood, A. J., Hopper, N. A., Simon, M.-N., Bouzid, S., Veron, M. and Williams,
J. G. (1992). Multiple roles for cAMP-dependent protein kinase during
Dictyostelium development. Dev. Biol. 149, 90-99.
Hereld, D., Vaughan, R., Kim, J. Y., Borleis, J. and Devreotes, P. (1994). Localization
of ligand-induced phosphorylation sites to serine slusters in the C-terminal domain of
the Dictyostelium cAMP receptor, cAR1. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 7036-7044.
Hoeller, O., Gong, D. and Weiner, O. D. (2014). How to understand and outwit
adaptation. Dev. Cell 28, 607-616.
Howe, A. K. (2004). Regulation of actin-based cell migration by cAMP/PKA.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta-Mol. Cell Res. 1692, 159-174.
Howe, A. K., Baldor, L. C. and Hogan, B. P. (2005). Spatial regulation of the cAMPdependent protein kinase during chemotactic cell migration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 102, 14320-14325.
Insall, R. H., Soede, R. D., Schaap, P. and Devreotes, P. N. (1994). Two cAMP
receptors activate common signaling pathways in Dictyostelium. Mol. Biol. Cell 5,
703-711.
Insall, R. H., Borleis, J. and Devreotes, P. N. (1996). The aimless RasGEF is
required for processing of chemotactic signals through G-protein-coupled
receptors in Dictyostelium. Curr. Biol. 6, 719-729.
Jeon, T. J., Lee, D.-J., Merlot, S., Weeks, G. and Firtel, R. A. (2007a). Rap1
controls cell adhesion and cell motility through the regulation of myosin II. J. Cell
Biol. 176, 1021-1033.
Jeon, T. J., Lee, D.-J., Lee, S., Weeks, G. and Firtel, R. A. (2007b). Regulation of
Rap1 activity by RapGAP1 controls cell adhesion at the front of chemotaxing cells.
J. Cell Biol. 179, 833-843.
Jones, S. L. and Sharief, Y. (2005). Asymmetrical protein kinase A activity
establishes neutrophil cytoskeletal polarity and enables chemotaxis. J. Leukoc.
Biol. 78, 248-258.
Kae, H., Lim, C. J., Spiegelman, G. B. and Weeks, G. (2004). Chemoattractantinduced Ras activation during Dictyostelium aggregation. EMBO Rep. 5, 602-606.
Kamimura, Y. and Devreotes, P. N. (2010). Phosphoinositide-dependent protein
kinase (PDK) activity regulates phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate-dependent
and -independent protein kinase B activation and chemotaxis. J. Biol. Chem. 285,
7938-7946.
Kamimura, Y., Tang, M. and Devreotes, P. (2009). Assays for chemotaxis and
chemoattractant-stimulated TorC2 activation and PKB substrate phosphorylation
in dictyostelium. Meth. Mol. Biol. 571, 255-270.
Khanna, A., Lotfi, P., Chavan, A. J., Montano, N. M., Bolourani, P., Weeks, G.,
Shen, Z., Briggs, S. P., Pots, H., Van Haastert, P. J. M. et al. (2016). The small
GTPases Ras and Rap1 bind to and control TORC2 activity. Sci. Rep. 6, 25823.
Kim, H.-J., Chang, W.-T., Meima, M., Gross, J. D. and Schaap, P. (1998). A novel
adenylyl cyclase detected in rapidly developing mutants of Dictyostelium. J. Biol.
Chem. 273, 30859-30862.
Kolaczkowska, E. and Kubes, P. (2013). Neutrophil recruitment and function in
health and inflammation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13, 159-175.
Kortholt, A., Rehmann, H., Kae, H., Bosgraaf, L., Keizer-Gunnink, I., Weeks, G.,
Wittinghofer, A. and Van Haastert, P. J. M. (2006). Characterization of the
GbpD-activated Rap1 pathway regulating adhesion and cell polarity in
dictyostelium discoideum. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 23367-23376.
Kortholt, A., Bolourani, P., Rehmann, H., Keizer-Gunnink, I., Weeks, G.,
Wittinghofer, A. and Van Haastert, P. J. M. (2010). A Rap/phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase pathway controls pseudopod formation [corrected]. Mol. Biol. Cell 21,
936-945.
Kortholt, A., Keizer-Gunnink, I., Kataria, R. and Van Haastert, P. J. M. (2013).
Ras activation and symmetry breaking during Dictyostelium chemotaxis. J. Cell
Sci. 126, 4502-4513.
Lee, S., Comer, F. I., Sasaki, A., McLeod, I. X., Duong, Y., Okumura, K., Yates,
J. R., III, Parent, C. A. and Firtel, R. A. (2005). TOR complex 2 integrates cell
movement during chemotaxis and signal relay in Dictyostelium. Mol. Biol. Cell 16,
4572-4583.
Liao, X.-H., Buggey, J. and Kimmel, A. R. (2010). Chemotactic activation of
Dictyostelium AGC-family kinases AKT and PKBR1 requires separate but
coordinated functions of PDK1 and TORC2. J. Cell Sci. 123, 983-992.
Liao, X.-H., Buggey, J., Lee, Y. K. and Kimmel, A. R. (2013). Chemoattractant
stimulation of TORC2 is regulated by receptor/G protein-targeted inhibitory
mechanisms that function upstream and inpdependently of an essential GEF/Ras
activation pathway in Dictyostelium. Mol. biol. Cell. 24, 2146-2155.
Lim, C. J., Spiegelman, G. B. and Weeks, G. (2001). RasC is required for optimal
activation of adenylyl cyclase and Akt/PKB during aggregation. EMBO J. 20,
4490-4499.
Lim, C. J., Kain, K. H., Tkachenko, E., Goldfinger, L. E., Gutierrez, E., Allen,
M. D., Groisman, A., Zhang, J. and Ginsberg, M. H. (2008). Integrin-mediated
protein kinase A activation at the leading edge of migrating cells. Mol. Biol. Cell 19,
4930-4941.
Loomis, W. F. (1998). Role of PKA in the timing of developmental events in
Dictyostelium cells. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 62, 684-694.

1557

Journal of Cell Science

RESEARCH ARTICLE

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Sasaki, A. T., Chun, C., Takeda, K. and Firtel, R. A. (2004). Localized Ras
signaling at the leading edge regulates PI3K, cell polarity, and directional cell
movement. J. Cell Biol. 167, 505-518.
Sasaki, A. T., Janetopoulos, C., Lee, S., Charest, P. G., Takeda, K., Sundheimer,
L. W., Meili, R., Devreotes, P. N. and Firtel, R. A. (2007). G protein-independent
Ras/PI3K/F-actin circuit regulates basic cell motility. J. Cell Biol. 178, 185-191.
Sö derbom, F., Anjard, C., Iranfar, N., Fuller, D. and Loomis, W. F. (1999). An
adenylyl cyclase that functions during late development of Dictyostelium.
Development 126, 5463-5471.
Stajdohar, M., Jeran, L., Kokosar, J., Blenkus, D., Janez, T., Kuspa, A., Shaulsky,
G. and Zupan, B. (2015). dictyExpress: visual analytics of NGS gene expression in
Dictyostelium. February 26, 2015, URL: https://www.dictyexpress.org.
Stepanovic, V., Wessels, D., Daniels, K., Loomis, W. F. and Soll, D. R. (2005).
Intracellular role of adenylyl cyclase in regulation of lateral pseudopod formation
during Dictyostelium chemotaxis. Eukaryot. Cell 4, 775-786.
Sun, T. J. and Devreotes, P. N. (1991). Gene targeting of the aggregation stage
cAMP receptor cAR1 in Dictyostelium. Genes Dev. 5, 572-582.
Swaney, K. F., Huang, C.-H. and Devreotes, P. N. (2010). Eukaryotic chemotaxis:
a network of signaling pathways controls motility, directional sensing, and polarity.
Annu. Rev. Biophys. 39, 265-289.
Takahashi, M., Dillon, T. J., Liu, C., Kariya, Y., Wang, Z. and Stork, P. J. S. (2013).
Protein kinase A-dependent phosphorylation of Rap1 regulates its membrane
localization and cell migration. J. Biol. Chem. 288, 27712-27723.
Takeda, K., Shao, D., Adler, M., Charest, P. G., Loomis, W. F., Levine, H.,
Groisman, A., Rappel, W.-J. and Firtel, R. A. (2012). Incoherent feedforward
control governs adaptation of activated ras in a eukaryotic chemotaxis pathway.
Sci. Signal. 5, ra2.
Tang, M., Wang, M., Changji, S., Iglesias, P. A., Devreotes, P. N. and Huang, C.H. (2014). Evolutionarily conserved coupling of adaptive and excitable networks
mediates eukaryotic chemotaxis. Nat. Commun. 5, 5175.
Theveneau, E. and Mayor, R. (2012). Neural crest delamination and migration:
From epithelium-to-mesenchyme transition to collective cell migration. Dev. Biol.
366, 34-54.
Toriyama, M., Mizuno, N., Fukami, T., Iguchi, T., Toriyama, M., Tago, K. and Itoh,
H. (2012). Phosphorylation of doublecortin by protein kinase A orchestrates
microtubule and actin dynamics to promote neuronal progenitor cell migration.
J. Biol. Chem. 287, 12691-12702.
Veltman, D. M., Akar, G., Bosgraaf, L. and Van Haastert, P. J. M. (2009). A new
set of extrachromosomal expression vectors for Dictyostelium discoideum.
Plasmid 61, 110-118.
Wang, F. (2009). The signaling mechanisms underlying cell polarity and
chemotaxis. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 1, a002980.
Wyckoff, J., Wang, W., Lin, E. Y., Wang, Y., Pixley, F., Stanley, E. R., Graf, T.,
Pollard, J. W., Segall, J. and Condeelis, J. (2004). A paracrine loop between
tumor cells and macrophages is required for tumor cell migration in mammary
tumors. Cancer. Res. 64, 7022-7029.
Xie, J., Ponuwei, G. A., Moore, C. E., Willars, G. B., Tee, A. R. and Herbert, T. P.
(2011). CAMP inhibits mammalian target of rapamycin complex-1 and -2
(mTORC1 and 2) by promoting complex dissociation and inhibiting mTOR
kinase activity. Cell. Signal. 23, 1927-1935.
Zeng, C., Anjard, C., Wille, S., Nellen, W., Primpke, G. and Wetterauer, B. (2001).
Interaction of gdt1 and protein kinase A (PKA) in the growth-differentiationtransition in Dictyostelium. Differentiation 67, 25-32.
Zernecke, A. and Weber, C. (2010). Chemokines in the vascular inflammatory
response of atherosclerosis. Cardiovasc. Res. 86, 192-201.
Zhang, H., Heid, P. J., Wessels, D., Daniels, K. J., Pham, T., Loomis, W. F. and
Soll, D. R. (2003). Constitutively active protein kinase A disrupts motility and
chemotaxis in Dictyostelium discoideum. Eukaryot. Cell 2, 62-75.
Zhang, S., Charest, P. G. and Firtel, R. A. (2008). Spatiotemporal regulation of Ras
activity provides directional sensing. Curr. Biol. 18, 1587-1593.
Zimmerman, N. P., Roy, I., Hauser, A. D., Wilson, J. M., Williams, C. L. and
Dwinell, M. B. (2013). Cyclic AMP regulates the migration and invasion potential
of human pancreatic cancer cells. Mol. Carcinog. 54, 203-215.

Journal of Cell Science

Mann, S. K. O. and Firtel, R. A. (1991). A developmentally regulated, putative
serine/threonine protein kinase is essential for development in Dictyostelium.
Mech. Dev. 35, 89-101.
Mann, S. K., Yonemoto, W. M., Taylor, S. S. and Firtel, R. A. (1992). DdPK3,
which plays essential roles during Dictyostelium development, encodes the
catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
89, 10701-10705.
Mann, S. K. O., Brown, J. M., Briscoe, C., Parent, C., Pitt, G., Devreotes, P. N.
and Firtel, R. A. (1997). Role of cAMP-dependent protein kinase in controlling
aggregation and postaggregative development in Dictyostelium. Dev. Biol. 183,
208-221.
Mavrakis, M., Lippincott-Schwartz, J., Stratakis, C. A. and Bossis, I. (2006).
Depletion of type IA regulatory subunit (RI) of protein kinase A (PKA) in
mammalian cells and tissues activates mTOR and causes autophagic deficiency.
Hum. Mol. Genet. 15, 2962-2971.
Meili, R., Ellsworth, C., Lee, S., Reddy, T. B., Ma, H. and Firtel, R. A. (1999).
Chemoattractant-mediated transient activation and membrane localization of Akt/
PKB is required for efficient chemotaxis to cAMP in Dictyostelium. EMBO J. 18,
2092-2105.
Meima, M. and Schaap, P. (1999). Dictyostelium development-socializing through
cAMP. Sem. Cell. Dev. Biol. 10, 567-576.
Miranda, E. R., Nam, E. A., Kuspa, A. and Shaulsky, G. (2015). The ABC
transporter, AbcB3, medaites cAMP export in D. discoideum development. Dev.
Biol. 397, 203-211.
Mun, H. and Jeon, T. J. (2012). Regulation of actin cytoskeleton by Rap1 binding to
RacGEF1. Mol. Cells 34, 71-76.
Nadella, K. S., Saji, M., Jacob, N. K., Pavel, E., Ringel, M. D. and Kirschner, L. S.
(2009). Regulation of actin function by protein kinase A-mediated phosphorylation
of Limk1. EMBO Rep. 10, 599-605.
Parent, C. A., Blacklock, B. J., Froehlich, W. M., Murphy, D. B. and Devreotes,
P. N. (1998). G protein signaling events are activated at the leading edge of
chemotactic cells. Cell 95, 81-91.
Paulucci-Holthauzen, A. A., Vergara, L. A., Bellot, L. J., Canton, D., Scott, J. D.
and O’Connor, K. L. (2009). Spatial distribution of protein kinase A activity during
cell migration is mediated by A-kinase anchoring protein AKAP Lbc. J. Biol. Chem.
284, 5956-5967.
Pidoux, G. and Taské n, K. (2010). Specificity and spatial dynamics of protein
kinase a signaling organized by A-kinase-anchoring proteins. J. Mol. Endocrinol.
44, 271-284.
Pitt, G. S., Brandt, R., Lin, K. C., Devreotes, P. N. and Schaap, P. (1993).
Extracellular cAMP is sufficient to restore developmental gene expression and
morphogenesis in Dictyostelium cells lacking the aggregation adenylyl cyclase
(ACA). Genes Dev. 7, 2172-2180.
Plak, K., Veltman, D., Fusetti, F., Beeksma, J., Rivero, F., Van Haastert, P. J. M.
and Kortholt, A. (2013). GxcC connects Rap and Rac signaling during
Dictyostelium development. BMC Cell. Biol. 14, 6.
Primpke, G., Iassonidou, V., Nellen, W. and Wetterauer, B. (2000). Role of cAMPdependent protein kinase during growth and early development of Dictyostelium
discoideum. Dev. Biol. 221, 101-111.
Reymond, C. D., Schaap, P., Vé ron, M. and Williams, J. G. (1995). Dual role of
cAMP during Dictyostelium development. Experientia 51, 1166-1174.
Richardson, B. E. and Lehmann, R. (2010). Mechanisms guiding primordial germ
cell migration: strategies from different organisms. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 11,
37-49.
Riedl, J., Crevenna, A. H., Kessenbrock, K., Yu, J. H., Neukirchen, D., Bista, M.,
Bradke, F., Jenne, D., Holak, T. A., Werb, Z. et al. (2008). Lifeact: a versatile
marker to visualize F-actin. Nat. Meth. 5, 605-607.
Rot, G., Parikh, A., Curk, T., Kuspa, A., Shaulsky, G. and Zupan, B. (2009).
dictyExpress: a Dictyostelium discoideum gene expression database with an
explorative data analysis web-based interface. BMC Bioinformatics 10, 265.
Sadik, C. D. and Luster, A. D. (2012). Lipid-cytokine-chemokine cascades
orchestrate leukocyte recruitment in inflammation. J. Leukoc. Biol. 91, 207-215.

Journal of Cell Science (2017) 130, 1545-1558 doi:10.1242/jcs.177170

1558

