DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY 192, 181–192 (1997)
ARTICLE NO. DB978720

Null Mutations of the Dictyostelium
Cyclic Nucleotide Phosphodiesterase Gene
Block Chemotactic Cell Movement
in Developing Aggregates
Richard Sucgang,*,1 Cornelis J. Weijer,† Florian Siegert,‡
Jakob Franke,* and Richard H. Kessin*
*Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, 630 West 168 Street, New York, New York 10032; †Department of Anatomy and
Physiology, Old Medical School, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 4HN, Scotland;
and ‡Zoologisches Institut, Universität München, Luisenstrasse 14, 80333 Munich, Germany

Extracellular cAMP is a critical messenger in the multicellular development of the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium
discoideum. The levels of cAMP are controlled by a cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (PDE) that is secreted by the cells.
The PDE gene (pdsA) is controlled by three promoters that permit expression during vegetative growth, during aggregation,
and in prestalk cells of the older structures. Targeted disruption of the gene aborts development, and complementation
with a modified pdsA restores development. Two distinct promoters must be used for full complementation, and an
inhibitory domain of the PDE must be removed. We took advantage of newly isolated PDE-null cells and the natural
chimerism of the organism to ask whether the absence of PDE affected individual cell behavior. PDE-null cells aggregated
with isogenic wild-type cells in chimeric mixtures, but could not move in a coordinated manner in mounds. The wildtype cells move inward toward the center of the mound, leaving many of the PDE-null cells at the periphery of the aggregate.
During the later stages of development, PDE-null cells in the chimera segregate to regions which correspond to the prestalk
region and the rear of the slug. Participation in the prespore/spore population returns with the restoration of a modified
pdsA to the null cells. q 1997 Academic Press

INTRODUCTION
During Dictyostelium discoideum’s development, starving cells generate pulses of extracellular cAMP which create
temporal gradients that attract other cells. Dictyostelium
amoebae respond to the pulses of cAMP in two ways: by
migrating to higher concentrations of cAMP and by secreting more cAMP. This results in propagating waves of
cAMP that guide the cells during aggregation to form
mounds of approximately 105 cells; within these mounds,
the cells undergo a series of movements to establish a tipped
mound, a slug, and finally, a mature fruiting body. Waves
of cAMP also occur in the multicellular structures
(Steinbock et al., 1993) and can be observed as propagating
1

Current address: Department of Biochemistry, Baylor College
of Medicine, 1 Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030.

optical density waves brought about by periodic changes in
cell shape in response to cAMP (Siegert and Weijer, 1995).
Cells in a slug move with periodic changes in velocity akin
to the chemotactic movements of aggregation (Siegert and
Weijer, 1992). Although disrupting the cAMP signal by overexpression or inhibition of the secreted phosphodiesterase
deranges development (Traynor et al., 1992; Wu et al.,
1995), cAMP does not provide positional information to the
developing cells (Wang and Kuspa, 1997).
Precursors to the terminal spores and stalk cells can be
identified within a developing aggregate. In the slug,
prestalk cells populate the anterior 15–20%, including the
tip, and in addition a number of prestalk cells are scattered
throughout the posterior of the slug; they are called the
anterior-like cells (ALC). There is also a population of
prestalk cells at the rear of the slug. Prespore cells constitute
the rest of the structure. The two cell types can be distinguished based on a number of criteria, including differential

0012-1606/97 $25.00
Copyright q 1997 by Academic Press
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

AID

DB 8720

/

6x30$$$261

181

11-06-97 23:01:38

dba

182

Sucgang et al.

staining by vital dyes (Bonner, 1952) and expression of tissue-specific marker genes (Williams and Morrison, 1994).
Prestalk and prespore cells can also be distinguished based
on their differential mobility toward cAMP, either in segregated cells (Mee et al., 1986) or in aggregates (Traynor et
al., 1992).
Cell-surface receptors (cARs) bind cAMP and transduce
the signal to different cellular responses, including cell
movement and gene expression (Hereld and Devreotes,
1992). Permanently elevated levels of extracellular cAMP,
which lead to receptor desensitization, are prevented
through the action of two extracellular cyclic nucleotide
phosphodiesterase (PDE) activities: a secreted soluble form
(ePDE) and a membrane-bound form (mPDE). While ePDE
levels accumulate as development progresses, mPDE levels
accumulate only during aggregation; after the mound forms,
mPDE levels fall rapidly. The ePDE can be inactivated by
a specific glycoprotein inhibitor (PDI), while the mPDE is
immune to inhibition as long as it is bound to the membrane. ePDE and mPDE activities are different forms of the
same protein, and all of the detectable mPDE activity has
been localized to the outer surface of the cell (Shapiro et
al., 1983; Malchow et al., 1972).
The PDE gene (pdsA) is developmentally regulated: a vegetative growth-specific promoter is inactivated when development begins, and an aggregation-stage promoter drives
expression during early development (Faure et al., 1990).
Later in development, a prestalk-specific promoter directs
expression at the tip of the slug and in other presumptive
stalk cells (Hall et al., 1993), most notably in the prestalk
A compartment (Jermyn et al., 1989). Overexpression of the
ePDE-specific inhibitor glycoprotein from the prestalk promoter of pdsA deranges terminal development (Wu et al.,
1995); therefore the presence of PDE during later development is critical.
We have constructed targeted gene disruption mutants of
pdsA and also modified the gene so that the new mutants
can be efficiently complemented. The gene disruption mutants of pdsA reflected the phenotype of the previously reported mutants: development was aborted, but the addition
of purified ePDE to PDE-null cells restored aggregation competence to the gene disruption mutant (Barra et al., 1980;
Faure et al., 1989). This suggested that the PDE protein need
only be present outside the cell and serves in the intercellular signaling mechanisms. Thus, a minority of PDE-null
cells in a population of wild-type cells should be able to
synergize and participate in forming the chimeric structures—but this is not the case. We have used the isogenic
null and parental cells to show that, even in the presence
of an excess of wild-type cells, the PDE-null cells have a
different fate. They move randomly within aggregates. The
wild-type cells are gathered in the center of the aggregate,
leaving the PDE-null cells more randomly spread, with a
large number in the periphery. The null cells fail to become
spores at the expected frequency, and become preferentially
cells at the front and rear of the slug. The PDE-null cells
later populate the upper and lower cups of the sorus, indicat-

ing that they have also formed a portion of the anterior-like
cells of the slug. Endogenous production of PDE by each
cell is necessary for efficient postaggregation localization
and for the formation of slugs. We found that during aggregation the elaboration of streams and large territories depends
critically on the amount of PDE provided by wild-type cells.
Because the product of pdsA is secreted, we attribute this
to cAMP receptor desensitization.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines. The parental strain DH1 (Caterina et al., 1994) was
a gift from P. Devreotes. It is a derivative of the axenic strain Ax3K
in which pyr5-6 has been deleted and requires exogenous uracil
for growth. The PDE-null strain uk7 was generated from DH1 by
targeted gene disruption, with pyr5-6 as a selectable marker.
Gene disruptions. pIX1.4 contains the cDNA of pdsA under
the control of the bacterial lacZ promoter and was made by subcloning the 1.4-kb BstBI/EcoRI fragment of pdsA cDNA (Lacombe
et al., 1986) into pUC19 digested with AccI and EcoRI. To generate
the PDE-null cells, the plasmid pIX1.4 was digested with ClaI. This
linearized the plasmid at the unmethylated ClaI site in the coding
sequence of pdsA. The plasmid pJB-1, a gift from P. Devreotes,
carries a fragment of the D. discoideum genome containing pyr56 (Jacquet et al., 1988) in the ClaI site of pBluescript II KS (Stratagene). The pyr5-6 cassette was isolated from pJB-1 by digesting
the plasmid with ClaI and purifying the 3.7-kb fragment. The fragment was ligated to the ClaI-linearized pIX1.4 to generate pUrK0.
In this plasmid, the direction of transcription of pyr5-6 was oriented
opposite to that of pdsA. The plasmid pUrK0 was introduced into
DH1 cells via electroporation (Howard et al., 1988). Parental cells
were grown to a density between 1 1 106 and 3 1 106 cells/ml. The
cells were harvested, washed once in buffer (250 mM sucrose, 1
mM sodium phosphate, pH 6.1), and resuspended to a density of
4 1 107 cells/ml in the same buffer. An aliquot of 0.4 ml was
electroporated in a 0.2-cm cuvette at 1.0–1.5 kV with 200 V at 3
mF. The time constant was 0.5–0.6 ms. Cells were permitted to
recover overnight in HL5 supplemented with uracil. To facilitate
isolating independent transformation events, the cells from one
electroporation cuvette were diluted in 20 ml FM medium (Franke
and Kessin, 1977) and subdivided among the wells of a 96-well
microtiter plate for growth under selective conditions. Each cuvette
did not yield more than 30 growing wells at a time. The resulting
transformants were screened for the expected genotype; of the
transformants with the correct genotype, one isolate named uk7
was chosen for all further study.
Development. For multicellular development, cells were
washed once in cold Sor/Ca buffer (16.7 mM Na2H/KH2PO4 , pH
6.0, supplemented with 50 mM CaCl2). The cells were resuspended
in Sor/Ca buffer to a density of 1 1 108 cells/ml, and 0.5 ml was
plated on Millipore filters resting on Whatman 17 filter pads saturated with Sor/Ca buffer as previously described (Franke et al.,
1987) or on 1% agar dissolved in KK2 buffer (20 mM potassium
phosphate, pH 6.8), at a density of 3.9 1 105 cells/cm2.
Enzyme assays. The PDE activity of the cells was measured in
two fractions: the extracellular medium and the cell membranes.
Extracellular buffer was harvested by squeezing the filter pads on
which the cells developed. To inactivate the PDI, the harvested
buffer was dialyzed against 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM
Tris (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5) overnight at 47C, then against 0.1

Copyright q 1997 by Academic Press. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

AID

DB 8720

/

6x30$$$261

11-06-97 23:01:38

dba

183

Null Mutations of the Phosphodiesterase Gene

FIG. 1. Strategy used in inactivating pdsA. (A) The structure of the gene with relevant restriction sites and primers. All Southern blots
employed genomic DNA digested with BstXI and were probed with a 0.9-kb BstXI fragment that contains most of the pdsA coding
sequence. As expected, a 0.9-kb band is detected in parental DNA digested with BstXI. (B) Disruption in the uk7 strain (uracil selection).
See Materials and Methods for details of constructs.

mM DTT in 50 mM Tris for 2–6 h at 47C. The dialyzed buffer was
referred to as the E fraction and contained the ePDE activity. The
cells were harvested by vigorous washing of the filters. The harvested cells were resuspended in 0.5 ml of 50 mM Tris, and broken
by one round of freezing at 0207C and thawing. Microscopic inspection was used to determine that the majority of cells were lysed
using this method. The lysate was centrifuged in a microfuge at
47C for 30 min to pellet the membrane fraction. The membrane
pellet was washed twice with 50 mM Tris. The washes did not
contain significant levels of PDE activity. The pellet was dissolved
in 0.2% Triton X-100 in 50 mM Tris. Residual debris was pelleted
by centrifugation in a microfuge for 15 min. The supernatant from
the Triton-extracted membranes contained the mPDE activity.
PDE activity was measured using a modification of a previously
described radiometric assay (Bulgakov and Van Haastert, 1983).
Deletion of a region of acidic amino acids. A pair of PCR products was used to generate a deletion of the acidic region (AR) of
the PDE. A map is shown in Fig. 1A. The primers AR5 (AAGTTAACGGAATTTACAATATTTA) and AR3 (AAGTTAACAGTAACGATGGTAGTAA) each contain a synthetic HpaI site and
match the sequences that flank the acidic region of pdsA. The
primer EcoTerm (GGTTTAACTTTGAC) is downstream of the
EcoRI site in the coding region of pdsA, and the primer RK2 (CCCACAAACGCCACACACTCAC) is located in the 5* untranslated
region of pdsA. Genomic DNA from DH1 was employed as a template to amplify a 0.5-kb fragment from the primers RK2 and AR5.
This fragment was treated with Klenow enzyme and subcloned
into the SmaI site of pUC18 to yield p213. The HpaI site was
adjacent to the BamHI site of pUC18. The inserted fragment was
sequenced to confirm that no PCR errors had occurred between
the HpaI site and the internal BstBI site. A 0.7-kb fragment was
obtained from the primers AR3 and EcoTerm. This fragment was
digested with EcoRI and HpaI, and was subcloned into pUC18 that
had been digested with EcoRI and HincII to yield the plasmid p301.

The subcloned fragment was sequenced to confirm that no errors
had occurred between the synthetic HpaI site and the internal NsiI
site. The plasmid p301 was digested with HincII and MscI, and the
resulting 0.6-kb fragment was subcloned into p213 that had been
digested with HpaI and HincII. The resulting plasmids were
checked for the presence of an HpaI site; one plasmid, p408, was
chosen. The fusion of the synthetic HpaI sites removes all nucleotides that code for the AR and replaces them with a single GTT
codon. To minimize the possibility of a PCR error causing an unintended mutation, p408 was digested with BstBI and NsiI to excise
the fully sequenced portion of the fused PCR products, and this
fragment was subcloned into pVH (pUC18 containing the EcoRV
to HincII fragment of the pdsA genomic clone) that had also been
digested with BstBI and NsiI. The result was pVHDAR. To attach
the appropriate promoters to the construct, the plasmid pGP-1,
which is a genomic clone of pdsA with its vegetative and late
promoters carried in pBR322 (Faure et al., 1989), was digested with
HindIII and AatII, treated with Klenow, and religated. This eliminated a pBR322-borne EcoRI site and rendered the EcoRI in the
pdsA coding sequence unique. The modified plasmid was renamed
pGP-1.1 to reflect this change. The plasmid pVHDAR was digested
with BstBI and EcoRI to excise the 0.9-kb fragment that lacks the
AR, and this fragment was subcloned into pGP-1.1 that had also
been digested with BstBI and EcoRI. The resulting plasmid, pGP1.1DAR, contains pdsA without the AR, under the control of the
vegetative and late promoters. To generate a construct of the modified gene (pdsADAR) under the control of the aggregation promoter,
the plasmid pGP-1.1DAR was digested with NruI and BstBI to remove the vegetative and late promoters. The aggregation promoter
was excised from the plasmid pAP53 (Hall et al., 1993) with SmaI
and AccI and this fragment was cloned into pGP-1.1DAR. The new
plasmid, pGPADAR, contains the modified pdsA under the control
of the aggregation promoter.
Dot blots. To assay for changes in specific activity, the ePDE

Copyright q 1997 by Academic Press. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

AID

DB 8720

/

6x30$$$261

11-06-97 23:01:38

dba

184

Sucgang et al.

extracts prepared from the different transformant strains were diluted to the same concentration of PDE units/ml, and serial dilutions were immobilized on nitrocellulose using a dot blot assay.
The blots were probed with polyclonal antibodies raised against a
synthetic peptide corresponding to the N-terminus of the processed
protein (Franke et al., 1991) and developed using horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies and the Renaissance chemiluminescence kit (NEN/Dupont).
Transformants. The constructs were cotransformed with
pB10TP-2 into PDE-null cell line uk7. The plasmid pB10TP-2 carries a neoR cassette that confers resistance to the drug G418 (Early
and Williams, 1987). The resulting transformed cells were screened
by Southern blot for multiple-copy integration events. Northern
blots were prepared from confirmed transformants using standard
techniques to verify overexpression of the transformed plasmid.
The strain uk7-A15gal was constructed by transforming uk7
with the plasmid pA15gal (Shaulsky et al., 1995), which carries the
neoR marker and the bacterial b-galactosidase gene lacZ under the
control of the D. discoideum actin-15 promoter. All cells used in
the mixing experiments were isogenic derivatives.
Tracking cells. To track cell movements in chimeric mixtures,
a representative number of cells were labeled with a fluorescent
dye prior to mixing. Cells were labeled with rhodamine dextran,
CellTracker green, or CellTracker red (Molecular Probes). To label
D. discoideum cells with CellTracker, washed cells were kept in
suspension with KK2 buffer containing 50 mM CellTracker red or
green at a density of 1 1 107 cells/ml for 30–60 minutes, and then
washed once in KK2 prior to use. All cells were stained by this
method, and they remained viable. CellTracker red yielded a punctate staining pattern, while CellTracker green had a more uniform
cytosolic stain. All gave the same results. The best staining was
obtained with CellTracker green, which was used in subsequent
tracking experiments. Fluorescently labeled cells constituted 2%
of the total number of cells in a chimeric mixture.
Dark-field waves and single-cell tracks were recorded and analyzed using equipment and methods previously reported (Siegert
and Weijer, 1989, 1992, 1995; Siegert et al., 1994). Briefly, structures
were imaged with a standard inverted microscope using a CCD
camera; digital images were averaged at regular intervals (usually
every 20 s), and stored onto a laser disk, under the control of an
Intel standard 486-based computer equipped with a custom-built
video capture board. Analyses of images were performed using custom written software (Siegert and Weijer, 1995).
Participation in spore formation. Since the terminally differentiated stalk cells are inviable, participation in spore formation
can be measured by permitting spores from chimeric fruiting bodies
to germinate and scoring for mutant clones that appear. PDE-null
cells are unable to aggregate, and form easily detected flat plaques
on a lawn of bacteria. PDE-null (uk7) cells and parental (DH1) cells
were mixed, and an aliquot was plated on Klebsiella aerogenes
lawns to determine the ratio of flat plaques to aggregating clones.
The remainder of the mixture was placed on sterile KK2 agar and
permitted to develop under conditions described earlier. After 30
h, when fruiting bodies are evident, the plate was washed with cold
KK2 buffer, and the harvested cells were washed once. The spores
were diluted to 2 1 106/ml and incubated at 457C for 30 min,
allowed to cool for 30 min, and heated to 457C for another 30 min.
This ensures killing of cells that have not differentiated into spores
(Cotter and Raper, 1968); because heating kills some wild-type
cells, we also killed nonspore cells with detergent (0.1% Triton X100). After heat or detergent treatment, spores were counted and
plated onto K. aerogenes lawns.

FIG. 2. Northern and Western blots show an altered mRNA and
no cross-reacting material in the mutants. (A) Northern blots of
gene disruptant uk7, alongside its isogenic parent DH1. RNA was
isolated form different stages of development, and the blots were
probed with labeled 0.9-kb BstXI fragment. The hours of development on filters are indicated on top of the lanes. (B) Western blots
with antibodies raised against the AR epitope (left) or the main
peptide of the PDE (right). The supernatants were harvested from
cells that had been starved for 6 h in Sor/Ca buffer.

LacZ and neutral red staining. In chimeric mixtures involving
cells that express lacZ, cells were plated on circles of Whatman
No. 50 filter paper saturated with KK2 buffer. At the appropriate
stages, filters were fixed in 1% gluteraldehyde, and the presence of
b-galactosidase was histochemically detected as previously described (Hall et al., 1993). Neutral red indicates the presence of
acidic autophagic vacuoles and was first used by Bonner (1952).

RESULTS
Gene disruption. The PDE-null strain uk7 was generated from DH1 by targeted gene disruption with pyr5-6,
utilizing a double crossover strategy (Fig. 1B). Northern
blots of RNA isolated from uk7 detected a residual mRNA
species that hybridized with the PDE probe (Fig. 2A). The
detected message was truncated by 0.2–0.3 kb, consistent
with the predicted messenger RNA that would result from
the gene disruption. The developmental timing was normal.
Enzyme assays detected no residual PDE activity in the
mPDE and ePDE fractions of the pdsA disruptant (data not
shown). Western blots, using two independent antibodies
that recognize sequences in the amino-terminus of the PDE,
failed to detect any protein in the disruptant (Fig. 2B). The
first antibody was raised against the region of 27 acidic

Copyright q 1997 by Academic Press. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

AID

DB 8720

/

6x30$$$261

11-06-97 23:01:38

dba

185

Null Mutations of the Phosphodiesterase Gene

FIG. 3. Absence of PDE suppresses expression of the cAR1 transcript. A Northern blot of a developmental time course of parental
and mutant strains is shown. Numbers indicate time in hours after
the onset of starvation.

amino acids (AR) in the amino-terminus and only recognizes the full-length PDE. The second antibody was raised
against a peptide sequence in the body of the secreted protein (Franke et al., 1991) and recognizes both the full-length
protein and the truncated form that appears in vivo when
the AR is removed. Because of the absence of enzymatic
activity and cross-reacting material, we considered these
cells PDE-null cells. Similar results were obtained with the
PDE-null strain called PEN, which was created by introducing a plasmid bearing the neoR cassette into the downstream
BstXI site of the pdsA locus of strain AX3K, employing a
single crossover strategy (data not shown).

The PDE-null cells do not enter multicellular development. This is consistent with the predicted phenotype based
on the original pdsA mutants (Barra et al., 1980; Faure et
al., 1989). When purified PDE was added to a lawn of PDEnull cells, the mutant cells became competent to aggregate,
although they did not proceed beyond the loose aggregate
stage. The inability of PDE-null cells to hydrolyze extracellular cAMP may result in constitutively elevated extracellular cAMP levels. The high-affinity cAMP receptor cAR1
is the primary transducer of the extracellular cAMP signal,
but it desensitizes when cAMP levels remain high. Thus,
the cAR1 receptors may be inactive in PDE-null cells. The
cAR1 receptor is encoded by carA, which is regulated by
aggregation and late stage promoters (Saxe et al., 1991). The
carA aggregation promoter is sensitive to levels of extracellular cAMP: it is strongly induced by oscillating levels of
cAMP, but is down-regulated by constant levels of extracellular cAMP. The late promoter of carA is induced by high
steady-state levels of extracellular cAMP. Northern blots of
RNA derived from the PDE-null cells show that, unlike the
parental cells, the PDE-null cells do not exhibit high levels
of carA message at 5–10 h of starvation, although a later
stage message is expressed (Fig. 3). The expression pattern
of the carA transcript in the PDE-null cells is consistent
with exposure to steady-state levels of extracellular cAMP.
Complementation of the null mutant. When a plasmid
containing the unmodified coding sequence for PDE was

FIG. 4. Higher levels of PDE activity result from constructs that lack the acidic region. (A and D) The normal expression pattern of
extracellular and membrane-bound PDE activity, respectively. (B and E) The patterns when the entire pdsA is expressed from the aggregation-specific promoter. (C and D) PDE activities when the PDE is driven by the prestalk-specific late promoter of the PDE. In all panels
the curves with open circles represent uk7 transformed with pdsADAR; closed circles represent uk7 transformed with pdsA.

Copyright q 1997 by Academic Press. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

AID

DB 8720

/

6x30$$$261

11-06-97 23:01:38

dba

186

Sucgang et al.

introduced into PDE-null cells, aggregation and a degree of
development were restored to the mutant cells only when
the cells were plated at high densities. Under low-density
monolayer conditions (see Materials and Methods), the
transformants did not aggregate, regardless of the promoters
controlling the introduced copies of pdsA. Transformants
were maintained under stringent selection conditions to
guarantee high copy numbers of the integrated pdsA, and
presumably high expression levels of the protein. In addition, the isolates from each transformation were screened
by Southern blot to confirm that the introduced pdsA was
present in multiple copies. When the transformants were
assayed for PDE activity, they expressed less than wild-type
ePDE activity and less mPDE activity (Fig. 4). Northern
blots of the transformants demonstrated that the introduced
copies of pdsA made messenger RNA of the correct size
(data not shown).
A form of the PDE from which the AR has been cleaved
is found exclusively in the secreted fraction. The 27 amino
acids of the AR were deleted to test the hypothesis that it
is involved in anchoring the PDE to the membrane. While
this was not the case, we did find that, when constructs
containing pdsA with the DAR modification were used to
transform PDE-null cells, the transformant cells synthesized higher levels of ePDE and mPDE activities (Fig. 4).
The AR is not needed for membrane attachment of the
enzyme, but appears to be an inhibitory domain of the PDE
protein. This inhibition is separate from that which occurs
by interaction of the PDE and the PDI.
The low PDE activity measured from uk7 transformants
overexpressing pdsA mRNA may be caused by the inability
to translate the messenger RNA or the synthesis of a protein
that is less active. These two possibilities were distinguished by comparing the relative amounts of PDE protein
in extracts containing identical amounts of PDE activity.
Aliquots of supernatants from transformants of uk7 that
contain equal units of PDE activity were immobilized on
nitrocellulose as dot blots and detected using a PDE antibody. The supernatants from transformants with the DAR
construct under control of the aggregation promoter exhibited a signal similar to the parental DH1 strain, while constructs with an intact PDE coding sequence showed more

FIG. 5. Dot blot showing that transformants expressing the DAR
construct have higher specific activity PDE. Cells were starved in
shaking suspension for 8 h, and the supernatant was harvested,
dialyzed against DTT to inactivate the PDI, and carefully assayed
to determine the PDE activity. Equal units of enzyme extract were
immobilized on nitrocellulose membrane, and the PDE was detected using the antibody raised against the main peptide (Fig. 2B).

FIG. 6. Complementation of the PDE-null aggregate-less phenotype. (A) The phenotype of uk7 cells overexpressing pdsADAR from
the aggregation promoter. (B) The phenotype when expression is
from the vegetative/late promoters. If the two transformants are
mixed in a 1:1 ratio, morphologically normal fruiting bodies are
restored (C).

cross-reacting material (Fig. 5). This was also true if the
vegetative/late promoters were in control of the gene (not
shown). Thus, removing the 27 amino acids of the acidic
region increases the specific activity of the enzyme. This
removal also occurs during the normal process of enzyme
maturation in vivo, probably extracellularly.
Unlike the transformants of uk7 with the complete PDE
coding sequence, transformants carrying multiple copies of
pdsADAR were able to aggregate under the low-density
monolayer conditions, consistent with the ability of the
DAR modification to make more functional PDE. The terminal phenotypes of the pdsADAR transformants depended
on the promoters that controlled the gene. If the pdsADAR
is under the control of the aggregation promoter, the transformants make stalk-like structures (Fig. 6A). Under the
control of the vegetative and late promoters, the pdsADAR
transformants stopped at the mound stage (Fig. 6B). This is
the same phenotype observed when the pdsA is overexpressed in wild-type cells under the control of the vegetative/late promoters, and is thought to be a consequence of
reducing the cAMP concentration within the mound
(Traynor et al., 1992). If the two different transformants
(PDE-nulls expressing pdsADAR from the aggregation promoter only and PDE-nulls expressing pdsADAR from the
vegetative and late promoters only) were mixed in a 1:1

Copyright q 1997 by Academic Press. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

AID

DB 8720

/

6x30$$$261

11-06-97 23:01:38

dba

187

Null Mutations of the Phosphodiesterase Gene

ratio, morphologically normal fruiting bodies resulted (Fig.
6C). Both the aggregation and the late promoters are necessary for normal development, although they do not have to
reside in the same cells to produce a phenotypically normal
fruiting body. The two types of transformant may have different fates within the apparently normal fruiting body.

The form of aggregation, the behavior of cells in mounds,
and the formation of slugs depend on the level of PDE. A
small proportion of parental cells can restore development
to PDE-null cells, but at low ratios of wild-type cells, the
normal aggregation streams are not found. When PDE-null
cells were mixed with parental cells in a ratio of 9:1, no

FIG. 7. PDE-null cells move randomly in chimeric mounds. The PDE-null mutant strain uk7 was mixed with the parental strain DH1
at a ratio of 9:1 (90% mutant to 10% wild type) and allowed to develop on agar plates. Prior to mixing, a small number of cells from
either strain were labeled with CellTracker green. (A and C) Fluorescence images of early mounds generated from these mixtures. (B and
D) Vector plots showing the direction of the movement of the labeled cells; the gray line denotes the boundary of the mound. (A) is from
a mound with the parental DH1 cells labeled. In C, mutant cells were labeled.

Copyright q 1997 by Academic Press. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

AID

DB 8720

/

6x30$$$261

11-06-97 23:01:38

dba

188

Sucgang et al.

streams of migrating cells were observed, but aggregates
still formed as single cells made their way directly into
centers. The mounds that formed from these aggregates
were smaller than those from 100% DH1 cells. Thus 10%
of the normal PDE is insufficient to gather cells from a large
territory. When the concentration of isogenic wild-type
cells passes 20%, normal aggregation is progressively restored. We speculate that the elaborate regulation of pdsA
has evolved to gather cells from a large area.
In early mounds generated from the chimeric mixtures
containing 10% DH1 cells, the optical density waves propagate as concentric rings from the center to the periphery,
unlike the multiarmed spirals of the parental DH1 cells (R.
Sucgang and C. Weijer, unpublished observations). No slugs
formed from these mounds, which proceeded directly to
culmination. This result suggests that slug formation requires substantial expression of PDE, and is consistent with
the results of Wu et al. (1995), who showed that suppressing
PDE by overexpressing PDI from a late-stage PDE promoter
also blocked slug formation.
Parental cells segregate from mutant cells in chimeric aggregates. We asked how the behavior of PDE-null cells in
mounds differs from that of isogenic parental cells. Each cell
population was labeled with a fluorescent dye, and time-lapse
videomicroscopy was used to capture the movements of the
labeled population as development proceeded. When 2% of
the cells in a DH1 population (wild type) were fluorescently
labeled, the labeled cells migrated into mounds and entered a
characteristic spiral motion, with periodic changes in velocity
similar to those observed during chemotactic aggregation
(Siegert and Weijer, 1989). In a chimeric mound formed from
a mixture of 10% DH1 cells (of which 20% were labeled)
and 90% PDE-null cells, the wild-type cells have the directed
motions characteristic of a mound made of 100% wild-type
cells (Figs. 7A and 7B). In contrast, the mutant cells, which
comigrated with parental cells during aggregation, did not
move in a coordinated rotational manner in the mound (Figs.
7C and 7D) and instead moved randomly. The images in Figs.
7A and 7C are single frames in a series of captured images.
The arrows in the vector plots in Figs. 7B and 7D show the
movement of the cells over 16 frames, captured 20 s apart.
Parental DH1 cells segregated from the mutant cells by moving into the center of the mound (Figs. 7A and 8).
If the parental cells constituted the majority of the cells
(2% PDE-null cells and 98% parental cells), early macroscopic aggregation phenomena such as dark-field waves and
stream formation occurred, PDE-null cells still moved randomly in the mounds, and the wild-type cells were drawn
by rotating waves into the center (data not shown), as was
the case with the experiments shown in Figs. 7 and 8.
As development proceeded, some PDE-null cells were recruited to the nascent tip. This is reflected in the finger and
slug stages, where the labeled PDE-null cells populated the
rear and tip regions of the slug (Figs. 9A and 9B). Figure 9C
shows the PDE-null cells in the stalk and lower cup of
chimeras. The lower cup is formed by the ALC population
(Williams and Morrison, 1994). Figure 9F shows the sorting

FIG. 8. Segregation of PDE-null and parental cells. Images of a
single mound formed from 90% PDE-null cells and 10% parental
cells, with subpopulations of each strain labeled with CellTracker
green (parental) or CellTracker red (PDE-null cells). Fluorescently
labeled cells of each kind constitute 2% of the total cell population.
The initial gray scale images were pseudocolored to distinguish the
double label and the two images were superimposed.

of PDE-null cells to the papilla of the fruiting body, which
is a prestalk region. Figure 9G shows cells that have been
complemented with the modified pdsA described above;
they no longer localize to the papilla, but populate the spore
mass. When the parental cells in the chimeras were marked
with CellTracker green, to locate the terminal fate of the
wild-type cells, we found that they preferentially populated
the spore mass (Figs. 9D and 9E).
Segregation of PDE-null cells is also shown by PDE-null
cells constitutively expressing the lacZ marker from a noncell-type-specific actin promoter (Fig. 10). Labeled wild-type
cells distributed randomly throughout the aggregate and participated in both stalk and spore formation (data not shown).
When lacZ-expressing PDE-null cells made up 20% of the
population, they preferentially populated the rear of the slug
(Fig. 10A). At higher proportions (80% uk7-A15gal:20%
Ax3K), mutant cells could also be observed in the tip of the
slug (Fig. 10B), although slugs form less frequently due to the
reduced PDE. Mutant cells were observed throughout the
stalk and the lower cup of the sorus (Fig. 10C). The uk7 cells
were also labeled with neutral red, which stains an acidic
autophagic vacuole that disappears in prespore cells (Fig. 11).
In chimeras of 50% uk7 and 50% AX3, the stained cells were
in the anterior compartment and in the rear of the slug, and
in fruiting bodies the stained uk7 cells labeled the base of the
fruiting body, the lower and upper cups, and the papilla. These

Copyright q 1997 by Academic Press. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

AID

DB 8720

/

6x30$$$261

11-06-97 23:01:38

dba

189

Null Mutations of the Phosphodiesterase Gene

FIG. 9. Behavior of PDE-null cells in postaggregation stages. PDE-null cells were labeled with the fluorescent dye CellTracker green and
mixed at a ratio of 1:50 with parental cells. (A) The PDE-null cells coaggregated with the parental cells, but when the slug formed, labeled
cells were found mostly in the rear end of the slug (arrow). (B) An image of a slug oriented toward the viewer. The tip is in focus and is
encircled with a solid white line, demonstrating that a number of the fluorescently labeled PDE-null cells were present there. The body
of the slug is out of focus, and the border is denoted by the broken line. (C) The chimeric fruiting body. (D) A fruiting body formed from
a mixture of 10% parental DH1 cells with 90% PDE-null cells. One-fifth of the parental cells were labeled with CellTracker green. (E)
The same fruiting body as in D, showing that the parental DH1 cells preferentially populate the spore mass. (F) A control mixture of 90%
uk7 cells, 10% DH1 cells, with 2% of the uk7 cells labeled. The labeled cells are in the papilla. The white line delineates the border of
the structures. (G) A chimera formed from DH1 cells and uk7 cells transformed with pdsADAR under the control of the vegetative/late
promoters. Transformant cells were labeled with CellTracker green. During the slug stage, transformants also were found throughout the
structure, akin to wild-type cells (not shown).

are the regions that in wild-type strains contain prestalk cells
and anterior-like cells.
If a cell in a chimera is at a disadvantage, this should
be reflected in the less efficient formation of spores. The
spores from chimeric mixtures exhibited far fewer PDEnull cells than the starting population (Table 1), indicating that PDE-null cells are less likely to differentiate into
spores, even if surrounded by a fivefold excess of parental
cells producing PDE.

DISCUSSION
Defined mutations in critical genes offer a way to compare mutants with isogenic parents. We have disrupted the

gene that codes for the cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase,
which controls extracellular cAMP levels and hence the
chemotactic responsiveness of cells at several stages of development. Gene disruption mutants made an altered PDE
mRNA, consistent with the localization of the insert in the
3* end of the gene, but no gene product could be detected
by enzyme assay or by Western blots.
In the Dictyostelium PDE a stretch of 27 acidic amino
acids (AR) follows the signal peptide; this region is normally
removed in the enzyme that is secreted into the medium.
Only with constructs which lack the AR could complete
complementation be achieved, allowing cells to aggregate
and develop at low cell densities. We postulate that this is

Copyright q 1997 by Academic Press. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

AID

DB 8720

/

6x30$$$261

11-06-97 23:01:38

dba

190

Sucgang et al.

FIG. 10. PDE-null cells preferentially populate prestalk and stalk regions in chimeras. The PDE-null strain uk7 was marked by introducing
a constitutively expressed copy of the bacterial lacZ. (A) A pair of slugs formed from a mixture of 10% uk7 with 90% Ax3K; blue cells
are seen almost exclusively in the rear-guard population. If the proportion of PDE-null cells is increased to 80% of the total population,
the incidence of slug formation decreases, but slugs that form have the PDE-null cells present in the tip of the slug as well (B). Later, Xgal-stained cells appear in the stalk and lower cup of the fruiting body (C).

due to the higher enzyme specific activity. This conclusion
is based on enzyme assays during time courses of development. Normalizing the results of enzyme assays to the
amount of cross-reacting material detected in dot blots indicates that the specific activity of the enzyme is increased
when it lacks the AR. The complementation studies also

showed that the aggregation-specific and the later prestalkspecific promoters are both necessary for normal development. Complementation with constructs driven by either
promoter alone results in an aggregate, but not a complete
fruiting body. When the two strains are mixed, development
of mature fruiting bodies is restored.

FIG. 11. PDE-null cells in chimeras express prestalk cell-specific structures. Neutral red-labeled uk7 or AX3 cells were mixed with an
equal number of unstained AX3 cells. Aggregates were allowed to form on agar, and the dish was wrapped so that only a slit was open
to admit light. The slugs formed and migrated toward the light for 36 h before they were photographed.

Copyright q 1997 by Academic Press. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

AID

DB 8720

/

6x30$$$261

11-06-97 23:01:38

dba

191

Null Mutations of the Phosphodiesterase Gene

TABLE 1
PDE-Null Cells in a Chimera Have a Decreased Probability of Forming Sporesa
Method of
killing nonspores
Heating
Detergent

Time of scoring

Total no. of
clones scored

No. of
PDE-null clones

% PDE-null cells
in the chimera

Before development (vegetative cells)
After development (spores)
Before development (vegetative cells)
After development (spores)

103
699
710
851

17
23
136
11

16.5%
3.3%
19.5%
1.3%

a

Mixtures of PDE-null cells and parental cells were made, and the ratio was determined by plating them on lawns of K. aerogenes. The
proportion of mutant cells was determined by scoring the number of flat plaques compared to the total number of clones. The mixture
was permitted to develop, and the cells were harvested after culmination. Cells that failed to become spores were killed by heat treatment
or washing in detergent.

cAMP serves a chemotactic role during aggregation, but
the details of its role in later development are still being
elaborated. We therefore examined the behavior of PDEnull cells in chimeras with isogenic parental cells. Because
PDE is an extracellular enzyme and is exported by a secretory pathway, we expected that mixing a few PDE-null cells
with a large number of wild-type cells would compensate
for the defect in the null cells. During aggregation, when
the cells are relatively separate, this is apparently the case.
PDE-null cells move into aggregates in a normal way. Once
the cells have converged, in the much closer confines of the
aggregate, the PDE-null cells behave differently. In mounds,
the parental cells move in concentric circles around signaling centers at the apex of the mound. The PDE-null cells,
even when present as a small minority (1 in 50), fail to move
in the directed manner of the PDE-expressing cells. We interpret this to mean that the cAMP receptors (either cAR1,
which is generally expressed, or cAR2, which is prestalk
specific) are not properly deadapted. As shown in Fig. 3,
this appears to be the case for the cAR1 transcript during
aggregation.
One explanation for the results is that PDE from adjacent
cells does not suffice because deadaptation depends on the
close association of PDE and cAMP receptors. It has recently been shown that cAR1, adenylate cyclase, and PDE
coexist in plasma-membrane microdomains (Xiao and
Devreotes, 1997), and it is possible that full signal attenuation
is only achieved when PDE exists in this configuration.
There is no reason to believe that the pdsA gene product
has a cytosolic effect on cAMP as an intracellular signaling
molecule. It is a glycosylated enzyme with a leader sequence, which presumably is efficiently sorted to membranous compartments of the secretory pathway and the extracellular space. Recently, an intracellular phosphodiesterase
was described (Shaulsky et al., 1996). This gene, called regA,
produces a PDE that is cAMP specific (G. Shaulsky and
W. F. Loomis, pers. comm.).
In chimeras of PDE-null cells and parental cells, the mutant cells fail to follow the circular pattern of the parental
cells. The consequence is that eventually the parental cells
tend toward the center of the aggregate, and many of the

PDE-null cells are left at the periphery. The next step in
development, following the mound stage, is an elongation
of the mound to form a structure called a finger or standing
slug. This occurs under the control of the centrally located
apical tip and pulls up centrally located cells first. The cells
on the periphery of the mound are left to form the rear of
the slug, as shown in Figs. 9 and 10. A few of the PDE-null
cells migrate to the tip and form the papilla, stalk cells, and
lower cup. Only a minority of the null cells form spores, a
number which can be quantified. If the effect of the mutation had been nil, and PDE from other cells could compensate, we would expect 80% of the PDE-null cells to form
spores. Instead, only 6–20% of the expected number of
spore cells are made by the PDE nulls (Table 1). The results
show that cAMP is a critical signaling molecule in the
mound and during later stages and that its degradation is a
cell-autonomous event.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge Jens Rietdorf, Dirk Dormann, Victor Zaydfudim, and Judy Venuti for their assistance. This
work was supported by NIH Grant GM33136 to R.H.K.

REFERENCES
Barra, J., Barrand, P., Blondelet, M. H., and Brachet, P. (1980). pdsA,
a gene involved in the production of active phosphodiesterase
during starvation of Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae. Mol.
Gen. Genet. 177, 607–613.
Bonner, J. T. (1952). The pattern of differentiation in amoeboid
slime molds. Am. Naturalist 86, 79–89.
Bulgakov, R., and Van Haastert, P. J. M. (1983). Isolation and partial
characterization of a cyclic GMP-dependent phosphodiesterase
from Dictyostelium discoideum. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 756,
56–66.
Caterina, M. J., Milne, J. L. S., and Devreotes, P. N. (1994). Mutation of the third intracellular loop of the cAMP receptor, cAR1,
of Dictyostelium yields mutants impaired in multiple signaling
pathways. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 1523–1532.

Copyright q 1997 by Academic Press. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

AID

DB 8720

/

6x30$$$261

11-06-97 23:01:38

dba

192

Sucgang et al.

Cotter, D., and Raper, K. (1968). Properties of germinating spores
of Dictyostelium discoideum. J. Bacteriol. 96, 1680–1689.
Early, A. E., and Williams, J. G. (1987). Two vectors which facilitate
gene manipulation and a simplified transformation procedure for
Dictyostelium discoideum. Gene 59, 99–106.
Faure, M., Franke, J., Hall, A. L., Podgorski, G. J., and Kessin, R. H.
(1990). The cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase gene of Dictyostelium discoideum contains 3 promoters specific for growth, aggregation, and late development. Mol. Cell. Biol. 10, 1921–1930.
Faure, M., Podgorski, G. J., Franke, J., and Kessin, R. H. (1989). Rescue of a Dictyostelium discoideum mutant defective in cyclic
nucleotide phosphodiesterase. Dev. Biol. 131, 366–372.
Franke, J., and Kessin, R. (1977). A defined minimal medium for
axenic strains of Dictyostelium discoideum. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 74, 2157–2161.
Franke, J., Faure, M., Wu, L., Podgorski, G. J., and Kessin, R. H.
(1991). Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase of Dictyostelium
discoideum and its glycoprotein inhibitor: Structure and expression of their genes. Dev. Genet. 12, 104–112.
Franke, J., Podgorski, G. J., and Kessin, R. H. (1987). The expression
of two transcripts of the phosphodiesterase gene during the development of Dictyostelium discoideum. Dev. Biol. 124, 504–511.
Hall, A. L., Franke, J., Faure, M., and Kessin, R. H. (1993). The role
of the cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase of Dictyostelium discoideum during growth, aggregation, and morphogenesis: Overexpression and localization studies with the separate promoters
of the pde. Dev. Biol. 157, 73–84.
Hereld, D., and Devreotes, P. N. (1992). The cAMP receptor family
of Dictyostelium. Int. Rev. Cytol. 137B, 35–47.
Howard, P. K., Ahern, K. G., and Firtel, R. A. (1988). Establishment
of a transient expression system for Dictyostelium discoideum.
Nucleic Acids Res. 16, 2613–2623.
Jacquet, M., Guilbaud, R., and Garreau, H. (1988). Sequence analysis of the DdPYR5-6 gene coding for UMP synthase in Dictyostelium discoideum and comparison with orotate phosphoribosyl
transferases and OMP decarboxylases. Mol. Gen. Genet. 211,
441–445.
Jermyn, K. A., Duffy, K. T., and Williams, J. G. (1989). A new anatomy of the prestalk zone in Dictyostelium. Nature 340, 144–
146.
Lacombe, M. L., Podgorski, G. J., Franke, J., and Kessin, R. H.
(1986). Molecular cloning and developmental expression of the
cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase gene of Dictyostelium discoideum. J. Biol. Chem. 261, 16811–16817.
Malchow, D., Nagele, B., Schwartz, H., and Gerisch, G. (1972).
Membrane-bound cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase in chemotactically responding cells of Dictyostelium discoideum. Eur. J. Biochem. 28, 136–142.
Mee, J. D., Tortolo, D. M., and Coukell, M. B. (1986). Chemotaxis-

associated properties of separated prestalk and prespore cells of
Dictyostelium discoideum. Biochem. Cell Biol. 64, 722–732.
Saxe, C. L., III, Johnson, R. L., Devreotes, P. N., and Kimmel, A. R.
(1991). Expression of a cAMP receptor gene of Dictyostelium and
evidence for a multigene family. Genes Dev. 5, 1–8.
Shapiro, R. I., Franke, J., Luna, E. J., and Kessin, R. H. (1983). A
comparison of the membrane-bound and extracellular cyclic
AMP phosphodiesterases of Dictyostelium discoideum. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 758, 49–57.
Shaulsky, G., Kuspa, A., and Loomis, W. F. (1995). A multidrug
resistance transporter serine protease gene is required for prestalk
specialization in Dictyostelium. Genes Dev. 9, 1111–1122.
Shaulsky, G., Escalante, R., and Loomis, W. F. (1996). Developmental signal transduction pathways uncovered by genetic suppressors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 15260–15265.
Siegert, F., and Weijer, C. (1989). Digital image processing of optical
density wave propagation in Dictyostelium discoideum and analysis of the effects of caffeine and ammonia. J. Cell Sci. 93, 325–
335.
Siegert, F., and Weijer, C. J. (1992). Three-dimensional scroll waves
organize Dictyostelium slugs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89,
6433–6437.
Siegert, F., and Weijer, C. J. (1995). Spiral and concentric waves
organize multicellular Dictyostelium mounds. Curr. Biol. 5,
937–943.
Siegert, F., Weijer, C. J., Nomura, A., and Miike, H. (1994). A gradient method for the quantitative analysis of cell movement and
tissue flow and its application to the analysis of multicellular
Dictyostelium development. J. Cell Sci. 107, 97–104.
Steinbock, O., Siegert, F., Muller, S. C., and Weijer, C. J. (1993).
Three-dimensional waves of excitation during Dictyostelium
morphogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90, 7332–7335.
Traynor, D., Kessin, R. H., and Williams, J. G. (1992). Chemotactic
sorting to cAMP in the multicellular stages of Dictyostelium
development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89, 8303–8307.
Wang, B., and Kuspa, A. (1997). Dictyostelium development in the
absence of cAMP. Science 277, 251–254.
Williams, J., and Morrison, A. (1994). Prestalk cell-differentiation
and movement during the morphogenesis of Dictyostelium discoideum. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 47, 1–27.
Wu, L., Franke, J., Blanton, R. L., Podgorski, G. J., and Kessin, R. H.
(1995). The phosphodiesterase secreted by prestalk cells is necessary for Dictyostelium morphogenesis. Dev. Biol. 167, 1–8.
Xiao, Z., and Devreotes, P. N. (1997). Identification of detergentresistant plasma membrane microdomains in Dictyostelium: Enrichment of signal transduction proteins. Mol. Biol. Cell 8, 855–
869.
Received for publication June 16, 1997
Accepted August 19, 1997

Copyright q 1997 by Academic Press. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

AID

DB 8720

/

6x30$$$261

11-06-97 23:01:38

dba

