RESEARCH ARTICLE
CELL BIOLOGY

Incoherent Feedforward Control Governs
Adaptation of Activated Ras in a Eukaryotic
Chemotaxis Pathway
Kosuke Takeda,1 Danying Shao,2 Micha Adler,3 Pascale G. Charest,1 William F. Loomis,1
Herbert Levine,2 Alex Groisman,3 Wouter-Jan Rappel,2* Richard A. Firtel1*

INTRODUCTION

Many biological systems that exhibit perfect adaptation use an integral
control strategy in which a buffering component of the signaling network
integrates the difference between the response and the desired basal amount.
This difference is then fed back to achieve perfect adaptation through negative regulation. Examples include bacterial chemotaxis (1–4), yeast osmoregulation (5), and calcium homeostasis in mammals (6). Integral control,
however, is not the only way to accomplish perfect adaptation. A systematic
computational analysis of a three-node network revealed that a second network topology can achieve robust perfect adaptation (7, 8). This topology
uses an incoherent feedforward mechanism (9) in which two nodes of the
network are activated proportionally by the input stimulus. These two nodes
then act on the third node with opposite effects (such that one activates and
one inhibits), leading to a transient response that adapts perfectly. To date,
no clear examples of biological networks that use the incoherent feedforward strategy have been identified, which is perhaps surprising because
networks that contain incoherent feedforward loops perform better than
those that use integral control (8).
Many eukaryotic cells can respond to steep or shallow chemoattractant
gradients over a wide range of chemoattractant concentrations (10, 11).
Not surprisingly, adaptation has been suggested to be a key component of
eukaryotic chemotaxis and to be essential for gradient sensing (12–15).
Indeed, many downstream biochemical components involved in the chemotaxis pathways display adaptive behavior (16–18). The precise mechanism
of this adaptation, however, is not clear, although it occurs downstream
from the chemoattractant receptors and coupled heterotrimeric guanosine
triphosphate (GTP)–binding proteins (G proteins) (19). Furthermore, even
though many components of the chemotactic pathways have been de1
Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. 2Department of
Physics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. 3Center
for Theoretical Biological Physics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA 92093, USA.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: rappel@physics.
ucsd.edu (W.-J.R.); rafirtel@ucsd.edu (R.A.F.)

scribed, the precise mechanisms of gradient sensing are not fully understood. A number of models for the initial response to gradients have been
proposed, most of which contain a global inhibitor that provides communication between the different parts of the cell (12, 13, 20–23). It remains a
challenge to distinguish between the different proposed mechanisms in the
absence of quantitative data for the kinetics of the underlying pathways.
RESULTS

To measure the adaptation kinetics of a eukaryotic chemotaxis signaling
pathway, we exposed cells of the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum
to sudden uniform (global) increases and decreases in the concentration of
the chemoattractant cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) by means
of a microfluidic device (Fig. 1A and fig. S1). We examined the dynamics
of activated Ras, Ras-GTP, with the Ras binding domain of human Raf1
[RBD–green fluorescent protein (GFP)] as a reporter, which preferentially measures activated RasG, the upstream activator of phosphoinositide
3-kinase (PI3K) (15, 24, 25). Ras proteins are molecular switches that bind
to and activate downstream effectors in their activated GTP- but not guanosine diphosphate (GDP)–bound state, with different Ras proteins activating a range of effectors. Ras proteins are activated by RasGEFs (guanine
nucleotide exchange factors), which exchange Ras-bound GDP for GTP,
and are inactivated by a slow, intrinsic guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase)
activity that can be stimulated >103-fold by RasGAPs (GTPase-activating
proteins). In unstimulated cells, RasG-GDP is distributed uniformly along
the plasma membrane. After the sudden exposure to a chemotactic gradient, RasG is rapidly and locally activated within seconds at the front of the
cell (24). This is followed by the Ras-GTP–dependent activation of PI3K
and the translocation of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate [PI(3,4,5)P3,
PIP3]–binding pleckstrin homology (PH) domains to the sites of RasG
activation (24, 26–28). Activation of RasG and a second Ras, RasC, at the
leading edge of chemotaxing cells is the earliest measurable signaling event
downstream of heterotrimeric G protein activation in a sequence of spatially
localized cellular redistributions of signaling molecules that eventually lead
to chemotactic motility (24, 29–31).

www.SCIENCESIGNALING.org

3 January 2012

Vol 5 Issue 205 ra2

1

Downloaded from https://www.science.org at University Erlangen Nuernberg on August 23, 2026

Adaptation in signaling systems, during which the output returns to a fixed baseline after a change in the
input, often involves negative feedback loops and plays a crucial role in eukaryotic chemotaxis. We
determined the dynamical response to a uniform change in chemoattractant concentration of a eukaryotic
chemotaxis pathway immediately downstream from G protein–coupled receptors. The response of an activated Ras showed near-perfect adaptation, leading us to attempt to fit the results using mathematical
models for the two possible simple network topologies that can provide perfect adaptation. Only the incoherent feedforward network accurately described the experimental results. This analysis revealed that
adaptation in this Ras pathway is achieved through the proportional activation of upstream components
and not through negative feedback loops. Furthermore, these results are consistent with a local excitation,
global inhibition mechanism for gradient sensing, possibly with a Ras guanosine triphosphatase–activating
protein acting as a global inhibitor.

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Using a microfluidic device (fig. S1), we switched the chemoattractant
concentration in the medium surrounding the cells within <1 s (Fig. 1B).
Multiple cells were imaged every 0.63 s by means of spinning disk confocal microscopy, and the dynamics of activated Ras was followed by the
translocation of RBD-GFP to the cell cortex (Fig. 1C). We quantified the
dynamics of Ras-GTP by selecting a cytosolic region of interest and measured the RBD-GFP intensity normalized by the average cytosolic intensity before cAMP stimulation and corrected for bleaching as a function of
time (Fig. 1D). Before changes in chemoattractant concentration, RBDGFP was uniformly distributed in the cytosol, with a low, basal amount at the
plasma membrane. After an increase in chemoattractant concentration, RBDGFP translocated rapidly to the cell membrane by binding to Ras-GTP, reaching a maximum at ~3 s. This was followed by a more gradual return to the
cytosol, where the RBD-GFP intensity returned to its basal amount in <35 s.
We verified that the intensity of membrane-associated RBD-GFP was inversely related to cytosolic RBD-GFP fluorescence, further illustrating the
translocation of RBD-GFP from cytosol to the membrane and back (fig. S2).
We quantified the degree of adaptation of Ras-GTP by exposing previously unstimulated cells to different chemoattractant concentrations
ranging from 1.0 × 10−2 to 1.0 × 103 nM (Fig. 2A). The response increased
for increasing concentrations and saturated by 1 mM of chemoattractant.
Furthermore, the peak time, Tpeak, defined as the time from the addition
of the stimulus to the peak of the response, decreased with increasing concentration of chemoattractant, consistent with previous experiments on the
kinetics of PIP3, a signaling component downstream from activated Ras
(32). By 35 s, the normalized RBD-GFP amount returned to the prestimulus

www.SCIENCESIGNALING.org

3 January 2012

Vol 5 Issue 205 ra2

2

Downloaded from https://www.science.org at University Erlangen Nuernberg on August 23, 2026

Fig. 1. A sudden change in uniform chemoattractant results in a transient
response of RBD-GFP to the membrane. (A) Drawing of channels of the
microfluidic device used in our experiments. (B) The concentration in a
test chamber of the device is switched within 1 s, as demonstrated by
recording the fluorescence intensity of a dye. (C) Images of a Dictyostelium
cell undergoing a sudden increase in cAMP concentration at t = 0 s. (D)
The cytosolic fluorescence intensity of RBD-GFP, normalized by the fluorescence intensity before stimulation and corrected for bleaching, as a
function of time after a sudden 1 mM cAMP increase at t = 0 s. The amplitude of the maximum response, Ipeak, and its time point, Tpeak, were
recorded for each experiment.

amount for all chemoattractant concentrations (Fig. 2B), indicating that
Ras-GTP adaptation was near perfect over a wide range of stimuli.
To further quantify the adaptation kinetics of Ras-GTP, we exposed cells
to a constant chemoattractant concentration for 10 min followed by a sudden increase in chemoattractant concentration. We computed the response
(maximum decrease in cytosolic RBD-GFP fluorescence), Ipeak, which reflects the translocation of the reporter to the membrane. These values were
normalized by the maximum response in naïve (not pretreated) cells after a
1 mM stimulus (Fig. 2C). Cells that were not pretreated with cAMP responded
to a chemoattractant increase that spanned three to four orders of magnitude
with an EC50 (median effective concentration) of about 0.25 nM. Furthermore, cells that were pretreated with 100 nM showed a considerable response
to a sudden increase in stimulus. Finally, Tpeak decreased with increasing
chemoattractant for the four different prestimulus amounts (Fig. 2D).
Finally, we examined the Ras-GTP kinetics in cells that were exposed
to a sudden increase and a subsequent sudden decrease in cAMP. In the
first experiment, the concentration went from 0 to 0.2 nM and back to 0 nM
(Fig. 2E). As before, the cytosolic RBD-GFP fluorescence decreased (due
to translocation of the reporter to the cortex) after the increase in chemoattractant, whereas the decrease in cAMP concentration led to a rapid increase in the cytosolic RBD-GFP fluorescence and a subsequent slow return
to the basal amount. In the second experiment, the concentrations changed
from 100 to 1000 nM and back to 100 nM (Fig. 2F) and, compared to the
first experiment (Fig. 2E), the return to basal amount after the decrease in
cAMP concentration was markedly faster.
Previous studies identified a number of feedback loops that involve
activated RasG, PI3K, and F-actin polymerization (24, 33–36). To determine the role of the F-actin feedback loop in the observed adaptation, we
treated cells with latrunculin B to block F-actin polymerization. Again, we
found that the cytosolic RBD-GFP amounts returned to basal amounts
after a sudden change in chemoattractant concentration, indicating that adaptation was not affected (fig. S3). Furthermore, latrunculin B treatment
did not have a major effect on either the dose-response curve (Fig. 2G) or
the characteristic response time (Fig. 2H). These results show that RasG
adaptation does not involve feedback loops containing actin and that the
signaling network responsible for the observed perfect adaptation is
upstream from F-actin polymerization.
This finding, combined with previous experimental results that demonstrate that adaptation occurs downstream from the receptors (19), motivated us to construct a mathematical model for adaptation that contained
only Ras-GTP, RasGEF, and RasGAP. To determine which network topology is consistent with our experimental data, we constructed models that
incorporate the two known three-node network topologies that can produce
perfect adaptation (Fig. 3, A and B) (7, 8). In the incoherent feedforward
topology, both the RasGEF and the RasGAP are activated by the chemoattractant signal acting through the receptors R (Fig. 3A). Because RasGEF
and RasGAP activate and inhibit Ras, respectively, this network can have
the properties of ultrasensitivity described by Goldbeter and Koshland
(37). In the integral control topology, the output of the model, Ras-GTP,
is fed back with the RasGAP as a buffering node (Fig. 3B). In both models,
the external stimulus is translated into an internal response through the
binding of the chemoattractant cAMP to the receptors.
Previous studies have identified several species of receptors with different binding affinities for cAMP (38). Thus, we included two types of
receptors in our models, one with a high affinity (R1, with a dissociation
constant of Kd1 = 60 nM) and one with a low affinity (R2, with a dissociation constant of Kd2 = 450 nM). We assumed that the two types of
receptors activate downstream components in an identical fashion. Numerical fits with only one receptor population resulted in dose-response curves
that were less accurate (text S1 and fig. S4).

RESEARCH ARTICLE

These models can be cast in terms of ordinary differential equations (text
S2) that can be integrated in time to determine the dynamical response for
various temporal patterns of the stimulus as a function of changes in the
amount of stimulus. To compare the dynamic response of the two topologies
to the experimental results, we performed mathematical fits, using a subset of
the experimental data. Specifically, we used the dose-response curves (Fig.
2C), the response time curves (Fig. 2D), and the peak times and amplitudes
after the decrease in cAMP concentration and the response amplitude 60 s
after the decrease (Fig. 2, E and F). We used a simulated annealing fitting
procedure (text S3) and, to avoid overfitting the data, used only two data sets,
nonpretreated cells and cells pretreated with 100 nM chemoattractant (Fig. 2,
C and D). The resulting numerical fit using 21 data points constrained the
nine free model parameters in both topologies. Our simulation results indicated that the integral control mechanism was incompatible with our experimental results. In particular, this mechanism displayed considerable
dependence of the adaptation kinetics on the size of the stimulus step (Fig.
3C). Contrary to our experimental results, for small concentration increases
this network led to oscillations, and time to reach the basal amount increased
markedly as the step size increased (fig. S5). This dependence could be analyzed analytically (text S4 and fig. S8). Additionally, other ways to implement
integral control are also incompatible with the experimental data (fig. S6).
Finally, a spatially extended version of the model, cast in partial differential
equations, resulted in qualitatively similar results (text S5 and fig. S9).
The results of the best fit using the incoherent feedforward network are
shown as solid lines in Fig. 2, C and D. In contrast to the integral control
topology, the RBD-GFP amount in the incoherent feedforward model
could respond to a wide range of concentrations of chemoattractant stimuli
and adapted quickly. Specifically, this network topology could respond
quickly even when the stimulus was large. Furthermore, the numerical
results track the experimental data well for all stimulus strengths, including
the data sets that were not explicitly fitted. The model parameters obtained
by our fitting procedure are listed in table S1.
A closer inspection of the results of our fitting procedure revealed that
the activation kinetics of RasGEF were faster than that of the RasGAP.

to 1 mM and a subsequent drop back to 100 nM. (G) The dose-response
curve for untreated cells after a sudden increase in cAMP with (red) and
without latrunculin B (black). (H) The peak time of the response as a
function of cAMP concentration with (red line) and without latrunculin B
(black line). (B), (C), (D), (G), and (H) represent the average response of
n = 60 cells from three independent experiments.

This is to be expected because a positive Ras-GTP response after an increase in cAMP requires that the activation step initially is larger than the
deactivation step. Eventually, the RasGAP kinetics catches up, resulting in
a steady-state Ras-GTP amount that is independent of the stimulus strength.
The kinetics of our model components is shown in Fig. 3D, where we plot
RasGAP, RasGEF, and Ras-GTP as a function of time, after a sudden increase in chemoattractant concentration. In Fig. 3E, we plot the full dynamical response in our simulations together with experimental results for
two jumps in the chemoattractant concentration. Finally, our simulation
results for the two experiments in which the concentration is increased and
then subsequently decreased are shown as solid lines in Fig. 2, E and F.
The agreement between the experiments and the simulations is excellent
for the entire time course of the experiments.
DISCUSSION

Our study examined the initial response to changes in uniform chemoattractant stimuli using a combined experimental and theoretical approach.
We did not consider possible responses with longer time scales, including
the formation of Ras patches (localized areas of increased concentration of
membrane-bound Ras-GTP) and cell polarization. We find that the response of activated RasG adapted perfectly for a large range of cAMP
stimuli, in particular for stimuli less than 1 mM. The inclusion of GEF saturation in our model could account for the possible deviation from perfect
adaptation for very large stimuli (text S2). We also found that the peak time
of the response of activated RasG decreases with increasing stimulus concentration. This is consistent with previous experiments on the kinetics of
membrane-bound PIP3, a signaling component downstream from activated
Ras, which showed that the peak value for PIP3 is reached faster for a high
value of cAMP stimulus (100 nM) than for a low value of cAMP (1 nM) (32).
Our combined experimental and theoretical analysis suggests that adaptation in the RasG signaling pathway does not rely on integral control
mechanisms that contain negative feedback loops. Instead, and unlike any
other biological systems analyzed to date, adaptation is achieved through

www.SCIENCESIGNALING.org

3 January 2012

Vol 5 Issue 205 ra2

3

Downloaded from https://www.science.org at University Erlangen Nuernberg on August 23, 2026

Fig. 2. Ras response adapts over a large
range of concentrations. (A) The RBDGFP cytosolic fluorescence intensity I(t)
as a function of time for different amounts
of stimulation. (B) The cytosolic fluorescence intensity of RBD-GFP after 35 s
as a function of the cAMP concentration.
(C) The RBD-GFP dose-response curves
for different pretreatment concentrations.
The x axis represents the poststimulation
concentration of the chemoattractant. The
symbols are the experimental results. The
solid lines are the results of our numerical
simulations using the incoherent feedforward network. The error bars here and elsewhere in this paper represent the SD. (D)
The time of the maximum RBD-GFP response
for different prestimulation and stimulation
amounts of cAMP (experiments: symbols; simulations: solid lines). (E and
F) I(t) as a function of time after a sudden increase (at 15 s) and a sudden
decrease (at 75 s) of cAMP concentration. The symbols correspond to the
experimental results, and the solid lines represent our numerical results. In
(E), the concentration increased from 0 to 0.2 nM, then decreased back to
0 nM. In (F), cells were exposed to 100 nM, followed by a sudden increase

RESEARCH ARTICLE
inhibitor RasGAP is the diffuse cytosolic component. This is consistent
with previous results showing that the RasG-GAP Dictyostelium NF1 is an
essential and uniformly distributed component of the directional sensing
mechanism and that in the absence of NF1, cells are unable to effectively
sense the chemoattractant gradient’s direction and exhibit extended RasG
activation (15). Further, our results argue that the RasG-GAP is not
constitutively active but is activated in response to chemoattractant stimulation and that this activation of both the RasGEF and the RasGAP is essential for gradient sensing and adaptation.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Growth and development

Temporal stimulation

Fig. 3. One network topology is consistent with the experimental data.
(A) The incoherent feedforward model of Ras adaptation considered
in this study. The chemoattractant binds to G protein–coupled receptors,
leading to the activation of both RasGEF and RasGAP, which activates
and inactivates Ras, respectively. (B) An implementation of the integral
control topology. The receptor activates a RasGEF that, in turn, activates
Ras. The RasGAP is activated by Ras-GTP and, through negative feedback, inactivates Ras, thus functioning as a buffering node. (C) The response of the integral control network, normalized to the prestimulus
RBD-GFP concentration, for different amounts of chemoattractant stimulation. (D) A typical time course of the RasGAP, RasGEF, and Ras-GTP
for the incoherent feedforward model after a sudden increase in chemoattractant at 0 s. (E) The full dynamical response of RBD-GFP in the
experiments (symbols) and in the fitted model (solid lines) for two different concentration increases.

the simultaneous activation of an activator and an inhibitor. In the model
we have analyzed here, the signal directly activates RasGEF and RasGAP,
and variants of the incoherent feedforward topology (fig. S7) will give similar results. Of course, an alternate possibility is that adaptation is achieved
downstream from the receptors and upstream from RasGEF. The output of
this adaptation module, containing unknown components, would then activate RasGEF, whereas RasGAP would be constitutively active. In either
case, our network is consistent with the local excitation, global inhibition
(LEGI) model (12) for gradient sensing that postulates that the response to
an external chemoattractant signal is governed by an intracellular membranebound activator and a diffuse inhibitor throughout the cell. Such a gradient
sensing model can convert the external gradient of bound receptors into
an internal gradient, especially if it is coupled to a module that further
amplifies the internal asymmetry (39, 40). Our model suggests that the
activator RasGEF is the local, membrane-bound component, whereas the

Developed cells were harvested, washed twice with phosphate buffer, and
loaded into microfluidic test chambers by means of a syringe and a blunt
cannula. Cells were allowed to settle and disperse on the coverslip at the
bottom of the test chambers for 15 to 30 min before imaging and stimulation. Before and during the exposure to cAMP, the cells were under the
same continuous shear flow of fresh medium, preventing the effect of
self-secreted cAMP and of stimulation by shear. Fluorescence images
were taken every 0.63 s with a Leica inverted confocal microscope with
a 63×/1.4 objective and a Hamamatsu EM CCD (charge-coupled device)
camera. Alexa Fluor 594 (Invitrogen) fluorescent dye was added to the
cAMP solutions used to monitor cAMP temporal change.

Microfluidic device and setup
The microfluidic device used in the study consisted of a polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS) chip with microchannels engraved on its surface and a #1.5 microscope cover glass sealing the microchannels (Fig. 1A and fig. S1). Its major elements were five observation chambers each situated upstream of a
dedicated outlet, a mixing channel, and resistance channels. The mixing
channel served the purpose of mixing the buffer flowing from the buffer
inlet with a concentrated cAMP solution flowing from the cAMP inlet to
deliver to the observation chambers a well-mixed solution with a reduced
concentration of cAMP. Steps of cAMP concentration with a transition
time of ~0.25 s were generated by switching the pressure at the cAMP
inlet with a solenoid valve.

Fluorescence microscopy methods

A series of confocal images of a 115 mm × 115 mm (512 × 512 pixels) region were recorded (SimplePCI) and saved as 16-bit grayscale bitmaps.
The images were processed in ImageJ by selecting, for each cell, a cytosolic
region of interest with the aid of a computer. To determine the cytosolic
region, we used a customized plug-in for ImageJ, which automatically outlined the cell perimeter. This perimeter was shrunk by 2 pixels, resulting in
the cell interior. Visible cytosolic organelles, defined as areas of very low or
very high fluorescence intensity, were omitted. The fluorescence signal for
the image at time t, Ic(t), was determined by taking the average value of all
pixels within the cell interior. We also determined the average cytosolic fluorescence intensity, Ic0, during the 18 frames immediately preceding cAMP

www.SCIENCESIGNALING.org

3 January 2012

Vol 5 Issue 205 ra2

4

Downloaded from https://www.science.org at University Erlangen Nuernberg on August 23, 2026

Transformed KAx-3 cells carrying an extrachromosomal construct in which
the regulatory region of Actin 15 drives a fusion of GFP to the Ras binding
domain of Raf were grown in suspension in HL5 medium. When exponentially growing cells reached 1 × 106 to 3 × 106 cells/ml, they were harvested
by centrifugation, washed in phosphate buffer, and resuspended in phosphate buffer at 5 × 106 cells/ml. Shaken cells were starved for 1 hour
before addition of pulses of 30 nM cAMP every 6 min for 5 hours.

RESEARCH ARTICLE
stimulation. The fluorescence signal was then normalized by computing the
following value: Ic,nor(t) = [Ic(t) − Ib]/(Ic0 − Ib), where Ib is the background
fluorescence intensity. For each experiment, the fluorescence signal was also corrected for bleaching effects. These bleaching effects typically account
for ~10% intensity loss during a 1-min recording. For the correction, we
determined the cytosolic fluorescence signal Ia for each cell in the absence
of any stimulation during a time interval that was identical to the one corresponding to the duration of the experiment. This signal was processed as
the signal in the actual experiment, resulting in a normalized time series,
Ia,nor (t) = [Ia(t) − Ib]/(Ia0 − Ib). The final cytosolic signal, as reported in this
study, was then computed as I(t) = Ic,nor(t)/Ia,nor(t).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS

REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. H. C. Berg, D. A. Brown, Chemotaxis in Escherichia coli analysed by three-dimensional
tracking. Nature 239, 500–504 (1972).
2. N. Barkai, S. Leibler, Robustness in simple biochemical networks. Nature 387,
913–917 (1997).
3. T. M. Yi, Y. Huang, M. I. Simon, J. Doyle, Robust perfect adaptation in bacterial
chemotaxis through integral feedback control. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97,
4649–4653 (2000).
4. R. G. Endres, N. S. Wingreen, Precise adaptation in bacterial chemotaxis through
“assistance neighborhoods”. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 13040–13044 (2006).
5. D. Muzzey, C. A. Gómez-Uribe, J. T. Mettetal, A. van Oudenaarden, A systems-level
analysis of perfect adaptation in yeast osmoregulation. Cell 138, 160–171 (2009).
6. H. El-Samad, J. P. Goff, M. Khammash, Calcium homeostasis and parturient hypocalcemia: An integral feedback perspective. J. Theor. Biol. 214, 17–29 (2002).
7. M. Behar, N. Hao, H. G. Dohlman, T. C. Elston, Mathematical and computational
analysis of adaptation via feedback inhibition in signal transduction pathways.
Biophys. J. 93, 806–821 (2007).
8. W. Ma, A. Trusina, H. El-Samad, W. A. Lim, C. Tang, Defining network topologies that
can achieve biochemical adaptation. Cell 138, 760–773 (2009).
9. S. S. Shen-Orr, R. Milo, S. Mangan, U. Alon, Network motifs in the transcriptional
regulation network of Escherichia coli. Nat. Genet. 31, 64–68 (2002).
10. D. Fuller, W. Chen, M. Adler, A. Groisman, H. Levine, W. J. Rappel, W. F. Loomis,
External and internal constraints on eukaryotic chemotaxis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
107, 9656–9659 (2010).
11. L. Song, S. M. Nadkarni, H. U. Bödeker, C. Beta, A. Bae, C. Franck, W. J. Rappel,
W. F. Loomis, E. Bodenschatz, Dictyostelium discoideum chemotaxis: Threshold
for directed motion. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 85, 981–989 (2006).
12. C. A. Parent, P. N. Devreotes, A cell’s sense of direction. Science 284, 765–770 (1999).
13. A. Levchenko, P. A. Iglesias, Models of eukaryotic gradient sensing: Application to
chemotaxis of amoebae and neutrophils. Biophys. J. 82, 50–63 (2002).
14. G. L. Ming, S. T. Wong, J. Henley, X. B. Yuan, H. J. Song, N. C. Spitzer, M. M. Poo,
Adaptation in the chemotactic guidance of nerve growth cones. Nature 417, 411–418
(2002).
15. S. Zhang, P. G. Charest, R. A. Firtel, Spatiotemporal regulation of Ras activity
provides directional sensing. Curr. Biol. 18, 1587–1593 (2008).
16. P. J. M. Van Haastert, P. R. Van der Heijden, Excitation, adaptation, and deadaptation
of the cAMP-mediated cGMP response in Dictyostelium discoideum. J. Cell Biol. 96,
347–353 (1983).

Acknowledgments: We thank P. Van Haastert for providing the Raf-GFP cells. Funding:
This work was supported by the U.S. NIH (PO1 GM078586). Author contributions: K.T.
performed the experiments with assistance from P.G.C. D.S. performed the modeling simulations. M.A. and A.G. designed and fabricated the microfluidic devices. R.A.F. and W.-J.R.
designed the experiments and modeling studies, with contributions from W.F.L. and H.L.
The manuscript was written by R.A.F. and W.-J.R. with assistance from all other authors.
Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Submitted 4 August 2011
Accepted 9 December 2011
Final Publication 3 January 2012
10.1126/scisignal.2002413
Citation: K. Takeda, D. Shao, M. Adler, P. G. Charest, W. F. Loomis, H. Levine,
A. Groisman, W.-J. Rappel, R. A. Firtel, Incoherent feedforward control governs
adaptation of activated Ras in a eukaryotic chemotaxis pathway. Sci. Signal. 5, ra2
(2012).

www.SCIENCESIGNALING.org

3 January 2012

Vol 5 Issue 205 ra2

5

Downloaded from https://www.science.org at University Erlangen Nuernberg on August 23, 2026

www.sciencesignaling.org/cgi/content/full/5/205/ra2/DC1
Text S1. Effects of two species of receptors.
Text S2. Model equations.
Text S3. Data fitting.
Text S4. Analytical analysis of the incoherent feedforward and the integral control topologies.
Text S5. Spatially extended models.
Fig. S1. Detailed drawing of the microfluidic device.
Fig. S2. Membrane-associated RBD-GFP is inversely related to cytosolic RBD-GFP
fluorescence.
Fig. S3. Responses in latrunculin-treated cells.
Fig. S4. Effects of different receptor populations.
Fig. S5. Response times for the different models.
Fig. S6. Possible integral control topologies.
Fig. S7. Possible incoherent feedforward topologies.
Fig. S8. Core model topologies.
Fig. S9. Comparison of the response in a spatially uniform and spatially extended model.
Table S1. Model parameters used in this study.
References

17. S. H. Zigmond, S. J. Sullivan, Sensory adaptation of leukocytes to chemotactic
peptides. J. Cell Biol. 82, 517–527 (1979).
18. X. Xu, M. Meier-Schellersheim, J. Yan, T. Jin, Locally controlled inhibitory mechanisms are
involved in eukaryotic GPCR-mediated chemosensing. J. Cell Biol. 178, 141–153 (2007).
19. C. Janetopoulos, T. Jin, P. Devreotes, Receptor-mediated activation of heterotrimeric
G-proteins in living cells. Science 291, 2408–2411 (2001).
20. W. J. Rappel, P. J. Thomas, H. Levine, W. F. Loomis, Establishing direction during
chemotaxis in eukaryotic cells. Biophys. J. 83, 1361–1367 (2002).
21. H. Levine, D. A. Kessler, W. J. Rappel, Directional sensing in eukaryotic chemotaxis:
A balanced inactivation model. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 9761–9766 (2006).
22. C. Beta, G. Amselem, E. Bodenschatz, A bistable mechanism for directional sensing.
New J. Phys. 10, 083015 (2008).
23. M. Postma, P. J. M. Van Haastert, A diffusion–translocation model for gradient sensing
by chemotactic cells. Biophys. J. 81, 1314–1323 (2001).
24. A. T. Sasaki, C. Chun, K. Takeda, R. A. Firtel, Localized Ras signaling at the leading
edge regulates P13K, cell polarity, and directional cell movement. J. Cell Biol. 167,
505–518 (2004).
25. H. Kae, A. Kortholt, H. Rehmann, R. H. Insall, P. J. Van Haastert, G. B. Spiegelman,
G. Weeks, Cyclic AMP signalling in Dictyostelium: G-proteins activate separate ras
pathways using specific RasGefs. EMBO Rep. 8, 477–482 (2007).
26. C. A. Parent, B. J. Blacklock, W. M. Froehlich, D. B. Murphy, P. N. Devreotes, G protein
signaling events are activated at the leading edge of chemotactic cells. Cell 95, 81–91 (1998).
27. R. Meili, C. Ellsworth, S. Lee, T. B. Reddy, H. Ma, R. A. Firtel, Chemoattractantmediated transient activation and membrane localization of Akt/PKB is required for
efficient chemotaxis to cAMP in Dictyostelium. EMBO J. 18, 2092–2105 (1999).
28. S. Funamoto, R. Meili, S. Lee, L. Parry, R. A. Firtel, Spatial and temporal regulation
of 3-phosphoinositides by PI 3-kinase and PTEN mediates chemotaxis. Cell 109,
611–623 (2002).
29. K. F. Swaney, C. H. Huang, P. N. Devreotes, Eukaryotic chemotaxis: A network of signaling pathways controls motility, directional sensing, and polarity. Annu. Rev. Biophys.
39, 265–289 (2010).
30. P. G. Charest, R. A. Firtel, Feedback signaling controls leading-edge formation during
chemotaxis. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 16, 339–347 (2006).
31. W. J. Rappel, W. F. Loomis, Eukaryotic chemotaxis. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Syst. Biol.
Med. 1, 141–149 (2009).
32. X. Xu, M. Meier-Schellersheim, X. Jiao, L. E. Nelson, T. Jin, Quantitative imaging of
single live cells reveals spatiotemporal dynamics of multistep signaling events of
chemoattractant gradient sensing in Dictyostelium. Mol. Biol. Cell 16, 676–688 (2005).
33. K. C. Park, F. Rivero, R. Meili, S. Lee, F. Apone, R. A. Firtel, Rac regulation of chemotaxis and morphogenesis in Dictyostelium. EMBO J. 23, 4177–4189 (2004).
34. P. G. Charest, Z. Shen, A. Lakoduk, A. T. Sasaki, S. P. Briggs, R. A. Firtel, A Ras
signaling complex controls the RasC-TORC2 pathway and directed cell migration.
Dev. Cell 18, 737–749 (2010).
35. M. Fivaz, S. Bandara, T. Inoue, T. Meyer, Robust neuronal symmetry breaking by
Ras-triggered local positive feedback. Curr. Biol. 18, 44–50 (2008).
36. A. T. Sasaki, C. Janetopoulos, S. Lee, P. G. Charest, K. Takeda, L. W. Sundheimer,
R. Meili, P. N. Devreotes, R. A. Firtel, G protein–independent Ras/PI3K/F-actin circuit
regulates basic cell motility. J. Cell Biol. 178, 185–191 (2007).
37. A. Goldbeter, D. E. Koshland Jr., An amplified sensitivity arising from covalent modification in biological systems. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 78, 6840–6844 (1981).
38. P. J. M. Van Haastert, R. J. W. De Wit, Demonstration of receptor heterogeneity and
affinity modulation by nonequilibrium binding experiments. The cell surface cAMP
receptor of Dictyostelium discoideum. J. Biol. Chem. 259, 13321–13328 (1984).
39. I. Hecht, D. A. Kessler, H. Levine, Transient localized patterns in noise-driven reactiondiffusion systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 158301 (2010).
40. Y. Xiong, C. H. Huang, P. A. Iglesias, P. N. Devreotes, Cells navigate with a localexcitation, global-inhibition-biased excitable network. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
107, 17079–17086 (2010).

Incoherent Feedforward Control Governs Adaptation of Activated Ras in a
Eukaryotic Chemotaxis Pathway
Kosuke Takeda, Danying Shao, Micha Adler, Pascale G. Charest, William F. Loomis, Herbert Levine, Alex Groisman,
Wouter-Jan Rappel, and Richard A. Firtel

Sci. Signal. 5 (205), . DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.2002413

View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/scisignal.2002413
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions

Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science Signaling (ISSN 1937-9145) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue
NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science Signaling is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Copyright © 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science

Downloaded from https://www.science.org at University Erlangen Nuernberg on August 23, 2026

Adapting Incoherently
The model organism Dictyostelium moves toward higher concentrations of the chemoattractant cAMP (cyclic
adenosine monophosphate), which activates a receptor that then stimulates effector proteins of the Ras family. Takeda
et al. sought to understand how Dictyostelium adapts to rapid changes in chemoattractant by measuring the kinetics
of Ras activation in cells exposed to cAMP. Mathematical modeling indicated that a signaling network in which the
chemoattractant activates two components, which respectively activate and inhibit a third component, accurately
described the data obtained from cAMP-stimulated cells. This type of network, called incoherent feedforward control,
may be conserved in other chemotactic signaling networks.

