www.sciencesignaling.org/cgi/content/full/5/205/ra2/DC1

Supplementary Materials for
Incoherent Feedforward Control Governs Adaptation of Activated Ras
in a Eukaryotic Chemotaxis Pathway
Kosuke Takeda, Danying Shao, Micha Adler, Pascale G. Charest, William F. Loomis,
Herbert Levine, Alex Groisman, Wouter-Jan Rappel,* Richard A. Firtel*
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: rappel@physics.ucsd.edu (W.-J.R.);
rafirtel@ucsd.edu (R.A.F.)
Published 3 January 2012, Sci. Signal. 5, ra2 (2012)
DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.2002413

The PDF file includes:
Text S1. Effects of two species of receptors.
Text S2. Model equations.
Text S3. Data fitting.
Text S4. Analytical analysis of the incoherent feedforward and the integral control
topologies.
Text S5. Spatially extended models.
Fig. S1. Detailed drawing of the microfluidic device.
Fig. S2. Membrane-associated RBD-GFP is inversely related to cytosolic RBD-GFP
fluorescence.
Fig. S3. Responses in latrunculin-treated cells.
Fig. S4. Effects of different receptor populations.
Fig. S5. Response times for the different models.
Fig. S6. Possible integral control topologies.
Fig. S7. Possible incoherent feedforward topologies.
Fig. S8. Core model topologies.
Fig. S9. Comparison of the response in a spatially uniform and spatially extended
model.
Table S1. Model parameters used in this study.
References

Text S1. Effects of two species of receptors.
Our model included two populations with different receptor affinities. Including only one
population led to a dose-response curve that fit less accurately with the experimental
results. This is demonstrated in fig. S4, in which we show the results of our simulations
if only the low affinity (dashed lines) or the high affinity receptor population (dotted lines)
was included. As a comparison, we also plotted our simulations results for the twopopulation receptor model. Inclusion of only the low affinity receptors led to a reduced
response for small values of the stimulus in the non-pretreated cells. The effect of only
high affinity receptors was more pronounced, because it increased the response at low
values in the non-pretreated cells. Furthermore, it greatly reduced the response in cells
that were pretreated with 100 nM cAMP.
We also calculated the Akaike’s information criterion, AIC, a measure of the relative
goodness of fit. This criterion is expressed as AIC
= 2k + χ 2 , where k is the number of
fitting parameters. We found the following values for this criterion: AIC=20.5 (for the
model with both receptor populations), AIC=31 (with only the receptors with Kd=60 nM),
and AIC=17.5 (with only the receptors with Kd=450 nM). This indicates that a model with
either both or only the low affinity receptors gives a better a fit than the model with only
the high affinity receptors.

Text S2. Model equations.
If we assume that the cytosolic concentration of all components is uniform, we can cast
the incoherent feed forward model and the integral control model in terms of a set of
coupled ordinary differential equations (ODEs). These equations, which describe the
dynamics of the concentrations of the components, can then be easily integrated to
determine the dynamics of the various components. For the incoherent feedforward
model, the equations take on the form:
dR1
= k R1 (cAMP + r1 )(R1tot − R1 ) − k− R1 R1
dt
dR2
= k R2 (cAMP + r2 )(R2tot − R2 ) − k− R2 R2
dt
R = R1 + R2
dGEF
= kGEF R − k−GEF GEF
dt
dGAP
= kGAP R − k−GAPGAP
dt
dRasGTP
= k RasGEF(Rastot − RasGTP ) − k− RasGAP RasGTP
dt
dRBD cyt
off
on
= k RBD
(RBD tot − RBD cyt ) − k RBD
RasGTP RBD cyt
dt
The first two equations describe the binding process of the external chemoattractant,
cAMP, to the two receptor populations, R1 and R2. One population has a large Kd value
and one has a small Kd value. The downstream activity of the bound receptors is
assumed to be the same for both populations, such that the effective input in the
equations for the downstream components is simply the sum, R. Also, we have allowed
for the possibility of constitutive activation, parameterized through r1 and r2. The fourth
and fifth equations describe the first order activation and deactivation of RasGEF and
RasGAP (denoted for brevity by GEF and GAP), and the sixth equation models the
dynamics of activated Ras, denoted here as RasGTP. The total concentration of Ras is
given by Rastot. The final equation describes the cytosolic reporter molecule RBD-GFP,
denoted by RBDcyt. Its total concentration is RBDtot and it binds membrane-bound
activated Ras, leading to a removal from the cytosol, and is removed from the
membrane with simple first order kinetics.
The equations for the integral control model are identical to the ones above, with the
dGAP
equation for RasGAP replaced by
= kGAP Ras GTP − k−GAP . This form of the equations
dt
contains a zero-order term, and can be derived from the full Michaelis-Menten kinetic
equations assuming saturation conditions (see also below) (1). We have verified
through direct simulations that the system with full Michaelis-Menten kinetics or first
order kinetics shows quantitatively similar behavior. In addition, we verified that

including a feedback loop from Ras to RasGEF, as suggested in previous studies (2),
does not change the qualitative results of the model.

Text S3. Data fitting.
To fit the experimental data, we chose 21 discrete experimental points that best
characterized the experimental data set. Specifically, we chose 5 points from the dose
response curve for the non-pretreated cells but excluded the response of nonpretreated cells to a 1 µM stimulus because we used this value to normalize our results.
Furthermore, we picked the 3 points of the dose-response curve for cells pretreated with
100 nM cAMP (Fig. 2C). The fit also used the equivalent 8 points of the time response
curves (Fig. 2D). The resulting 16 points were supplemented by 5 points from the 2
experiments shown in Fig. 2, E and F, (0 to 0.2 nM, followed by 0 nM and 100 nM to 1
µM, followed by 100 nM). These were the peak amplitudes, estimated to be 1.0905 and
1.1196, and peak times, taken to be 19.5 sec and 8 sec, following a decrease in the
cAMP concentration. Finally, the last point used in our fit was the amplitude of the
response 60 sec after a change in concentration from 0.2 nM to 0, estimated to be
equal to 1 (Fig. 2E).
Our model contains 18 parameters, of which we fixed 9: We chose the off rates of the 2
receptors populations to be equal to the values found in single molecule experiments (3):
k-R1=0.16 s-1 and k-R2=1.1 s-1. Furthermore, we fixed kR1 and kR2 by taking the
disassociation constant for the high affinity receptor population to be 60 nM and for the
low affinity population to be 450 nM, consistent with experimental values(4). We further
reduced the number of free parameters by noticing that kGEF did not affect the kinetics of
GEF activation and was related only to the amount of GEF, which regulates Ras
activation. Because kRas also regulates activation of Ras, we simply took kGEF=0.1k-GEF.
Similarly, we fixed kGAP=0.1k-GAP. Moreover, because k-GAP should always be smaller
than k-GEF, and because the system is primarily sensitive to the ratio of the two
parameters, we used ln(k-GEF/k-GAP) instead of k-GAP as a fitting parameter. Finally, we
normalized the Ras and RBD concentrations so that Rastot=1 and RBDtot=1.
The model equations were integrated in time until a steady state was obtained. The
resulting numerical values of the N=21 fit points, xisim , were then compared to the
experimental values, xiexp , using the following error function
2

exp
sim
1 21  xi − xi 
,
E = ∑
N i=1  σ iexp 

where σiexp (i=1,2,…,21) are standard deviations of the experimental data for each fit
point. The task is to search for the parameter set k that minimizes E: k = arg min(E) .
k

Because the resulting 9-dimensional parameter space can have numerous local minima,
we chose simulated annealing as our method of fitting. Unlike other algorithms,
simulated annealing samples a large region of parameter space and does not reject
parameter choices that do not improve the fit (5). This is done by assigning an artificial
temperature and “cooling” the system. Specifically, we started from a high temperature
(T=3000), performed 100 parameter searches at each iteration and reduced the

temperature by 10% after each iteration. Our program ended when the step size in the
parameter space became smaller than a defined cut-off value or when the temperature
had been decreased for 100 times, whichever came first. To enlarge the searchable
area in parameter space, we started the program from different initial conditions. The
resulting parameters, corresponding to a fit with E=0.12, are shown in Table S1.
We have also performed fits using different experimental data points and slightly
different versions of the model equations. For example, in one fit we used all the data
from Fig. 2, C to F, whereas in another fit, we excluded the possibility of constitutive
activation of the receptors (such that r1=0 and r2=0). These fits still duplicated the
experimental data well, with an error function that was less that 0.3. Furthermore, the
parameters that were selected were always close to the ones shown in Table S1,
indicating that our fitting was not very sensitive to the choice of fit points or the specific
details of the model. This was not surprising, because the experimental data put
considerable constraints on the possible range of the parameters. In particular, the
observed transient depletion of the cytosol following an increase in chemoattractant
required that k-GEF was always larger than k-GAP. Furthermore, k-GAP determined the time
scale of the return to basal amount and was thus constrained by the experimentally
observed values. Also, the peak amplitude of the response limited the allowed ratios of
k-GAP and k-GEF. Finally, the fraction of low affinity receptors, R2tot , needed to be large
because cells pre-treated with 100 nM of chemoattractant showed a substantial
response.

Text S4. Analytical analysis of the incoherent feedforward and the integral control
topologies.
The core of the incoherent feedforward model can be represented by Fig. S8A, where
the input signal S activates both A and B, which control the dynamics of the output X.
The equations describing this core motif can be written as

dA
= k a S − k− a A
dt
dB
= kb S − k− b B
dt
dX
= k x A(1 − X ) − k− x BX
dt

(1)
(2)
(3)

where we normalized the X equation by the total amount of X. The steady state values
k
k
of A and B depend on S, A0 = a S, B0 = b S , whereas the steady state amount of X is
k− a
k− b

k x A0
. Thus, because both A0 and B0 depend linearly on S, X0 will be
k x A0 + k− x B0
independent of S. A linear stability analysis for the steady state of the system can be
carried out. The growth mode λ is given by the solution of the following eigenvalue
problem:
X0 =

−k− a − λ

0

0

0

−k− b − λ

0

k x (1 − X 0 )

−k− x X 0

−k x A0 − k− x B0 − λ

=0

These eigenvalues are always real and negative, demonstrating that the steady state is
linearly stable and that X does not exhibit oscillations.
The kinetics of X depends on the amount of A and B present. For small values of S,
both A and B are small and the kinetics of X is slow. That is, Eqn.(1) and Eqn.(2) are
much faster than Eqn.(3) and we can approximate A and B by their quasi-steady state
k
k
values: A ~ a S , B ~ b S . Then, Eqn.(3) can be written as
k− a
k− b
k k
1 dX k x ka
(1 − X ) − − x b X
=
S dt
k− a
k− b

Thus, the timescale of recovery for X, τ, is inversely proportional to the signal strength,
τ ~ 1/ S . On the other hand, when S is large, Eqn.(3) equilibrates quickly and

k
kx A
. Because both A and B are linearly dependent on S, A = a S(1 − e− k− a t )
k− a
k x A + k− x B
k
and B = b S(1 − e− k− b t ) , we find that the kinetics of X are independent of S.
k−b
X~

The integral control models, with negative feedback, can be represented by two core
motifs. For analytical convenience, we assume that the activation of activator A is fast
compared to the timescales for B and X. Then, these motifs reduce to two-node
topologies and in the first one (Fig. S8B), the buffering node is activated by X and
deactivates X:
dX
= k x S(1 − X ) − k− x BX
dt
dB
= kb X − k− b
dt

(4)
(5)

The zero-order terms in these equations, and in the ones for the second motif below
were chosen to facilitate the analytical treatment and can be derived in certain limits of
the full Michaelis-Menten kinetic equations (1). We have verified through numerical
simulations that the system with full Michaelis-Menten dynamics shows qualitatively
similar behavior.

k− b
k S(1 − X 0 )
and B0 = x
. A linearization around
kb
k− x X 0
these steady state values gives as the growth modes:
The steady state amounts are X 0 =
−k x S − k− x B0 − λ −k− x X 0
kb

−λ

=0

⇒

λ 2 + (k x S + k− x B0 )λ + k− x k− b = 0

Imaginary values for these modes will result in oscillations in the value of X for constant
S. To avoid these oscillations, one has to choose a small enough value for k-b. Of
course, it might also possible to suppress these oscillations through additional loops in
the network.
When Eqn. (4) is much faster than Eqn. (5), we can approximate B by its quasi-steady
k S (1 − X )
k S dX
dB
state value B ~ x
. Then,
kb X − k− b and
=
− x 2
=
dt
k− x X dt
k− x X

S

k
dX
= − − x X 2 (kb X − k− b )
kx
dt

Thus, the recovery time scale τ increases with S: τ ~ S , inconsistent with the
experimental results.

In the second motif (Fig. S8C), the buffering node B activates X and is deactivated by X.
Because B is not activated by the signal, we will assume a constant constitutive
activation:
dX
= k x (S + c)B(1 − X ) − k− x X
dt
dB
= kb − k− b X
dt

with steady-state values X 0 =

kb
and B0 =
k− b

−
The linear stability is found by solving

k− x

(6)
(7)

kb
k− b

k x (S + c)(1 −

k− x
−λ
kb
1−
k− b

kb
)
k− b

k x (S + c)(1 −

kb
)
k− b

= 0,

−λ

−k− b

k− x
λ + k x (S + c)(k− b − kb ) = 0 . Thus, again, the kinetics of the buffering
kb
1−
k− b
node B, characterized by k-b, needs to be slow to avoid oscillations. Then, Eqn.(6) will
k x ( S + c) B
equilibrate quickly, and X ≈
. For large values of S, X reaches its peak
k x ( S + c) B + k− x
Xpeak≈1 (Fig. S6G) and remains saturated for a prolonged period. During this time, the
dB
decay rate of B is about
≈ kb − k− b , leading to
dt
k x k− x ( S + c)
k x k− x ( S + c)
dX
dB
≈
≈
( kb − k − b ) .
2
dt [k x ( S + c) B + k− x ] dt [k x ( S + c) B0 + k− x ]2

leading to λ 2 +

The saturation time can be estimated to be Tsaturation ≈
state value of B before the stimulus step.

B0, pre
k− b − kb

where B0, pre is the steady

Text S5. Spatially extended models.
A spatially extended version of the adaptation model can be formulated in a
straightforward manner. In this spatially extended version of the LEGI model, both GAP
and RBDcyt diffuse in the cytosol with diffusion constants DGAP and DRBD, respectively.
The above equations for the receptors and GEF are unchanged and the remaining
equations now describe the concentration in the cytosol and on the membrane in terms
of partial different equations (PDEs):
dGAP mem
on
= kGAP
GAP cyt − k−GAPGAP mem
dt
∂GAP cyt
= DGAP∇ 2GAP cyt
∂t
dRasGTP
= k RasGEF(Rastot − RasGTP ) − k− RasGAP mem RasGTP
dt
dRBD mem
on
off
RasGTP RBD cyt − k RBD
RBD mem
= k RBD
dt
∂RBD cyt
= DRBD ∇ 2 RBD cyt
∂t

These equations need to be supplemented with the boundary conditions

∂GAP cyt
on
GAP cyt
= kGAP R − kGAP
∂n
∂RBD cyt
off
on
RBD mem
RasGTP RBD cyt + k RBD
= −k RBD
DRBD
∂n

DGAP

where n is the normal to the cell membrane.
We have simulated these equations, representing a spatially extended implementation
of the LEGI model (6), using a disk-shaped cell with radius R=5 µm. The resulting
RBDcyt dynamics, following an increase in cAMP, is shown in Fig. S9 as symbols. The
corresponding RBDcyt dynamics for the case where the cytosolic RBD-GFP
concentration is assumed to be uniform and the equations can be described by ODEs is
plotted as a solid line. A comparison reveals that both models display the same
quantitative behavior. Of course, this result is not surprising because, as long as DRBD is
large enough, the spatial variations of RBDcyt will be negligible.

Fig. S1: Detailed drawing of the microfluidic device

A detailed drawing of microchannels in the microfluidic device used in this study. Microchannels
with depths of 30 and 120 µm are shown in green and blue, respectively. Circles mark the inlet
and outlet ports. The device consisted of a chip made of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), with
microchannels engraved on its surface, and a cover glass sealing the microchannel. The chip
was cast of PDMS using a master mold fabricated with standard UV photolithography. A 5 inch
silicon wafer was spin-coated with a 30 µm of a UV-curable epoxy (SU8-2015 by Microchem),
exposed to UV-light through a photomask, spin-coated with another layer of epoxy to a total
thickness of 120 µm, exposed to UV-light through another photomask, and developed. The
microfluidic device had three inlets: for a buffer, a concentrated solution of cAMP, and a solution
of fluorescent dye (Alexa 594). The device also had a vent and five outlets. The microchannel
network of the device consisted of 30 µm and 120 µm deep channels. Its major elements were 5
observation chambers, each situated upstream of a dedicated outlet, a mixing channel, and
resistance channels. At its upstream end, the mixing channel was connected to the three inlets,
and at its downstream end the mixing channel was connected to the 5 observation chambers.
The mixing channel was a modification of a previous design (7) and consisted of a chain of 18
identical segments with 30 and 120 µm deep elements that generated a three-dimensional flow
with stretching and folding that promoted efficient mixing.

The flow in the device was driven by the application of differential pressures between the inlets
and outlets of the device. The pressures were controlled either hydrostatically, by setting certain
height differences between the reservoirs feeding the inlets and the reservoirs connected to the
outlets and the vent, or by pressurizing the inlet reservoirs with compressed air supplied by an
accurate regulator (8310 by Porter Instruments) with the pressure measured by a sensitive
electronic gauge (Cecomp GPG1000B). All 5 outlets of the device were connected to a single
reservoir through 5 separate lines of Tygon tubing. At any given time, the flow through 4 out of 5
outlets was blocked (by mechanically clamping the tubing lines connected to the outlets) and
the entire flow through the mixing channel was directed towards a single observation chamber
(and a single outlet). The microchannel network was designed such that the flow rate through
an active observation chamber was set solely by the pressure at the buffer inlet that remained
constant throughout an experiment. The concentration of cAMP in the active observation
chamber was a linear function of the difference between the pressure at the cAMP inlet, Pc , and
a certain reference pressure, P0 . At Pc < P0 , the entire stream of the concentrated cAMP
solution was diverted towards the vent, resulting in 0 cAMP concentration in the observation
chamber ( [cAMP ] = 0 ). At Pc > P0 , the concentration of cAMP in the observation chamber was

[cAMP ] = α [cAMP ]0 ( Pc − P0 ) , where [cAMP ]0 was the concentration of cAMP in the solution
fed to the cAMP inlet. The coefficient α was equal to 1 /( Pmax − P0 ) , where Pmax was the pressure
at which the solution in the observation chamber was the same as the solution fed to the cAMP
inlet. In our experiments, the pressure at the cAMP outlet was always below this limit ( Pc < Pmax ).
To calibrate a device and find the values P0 and Pmax for the device, we used the fluorescent
dye that was fed to the dye inlet. During the calibration, the dye inlet was open and pressurized
and the cAMP inlet was blocked. In contrast, during the experiments on Dictyostelium cells, the
dye inlet was blocked, whereas the cAMP inlet was open and pressurized. To change [cAMP ]
in the active observation chamber, the pressure at the cAMP inlet was abruptly changed using
pressure-regulated compressed air and a solenoid valve. The transition time for the
concentration change in an observation chamber (near its upstream end) was 0.26 s based on a
10% to 90% criterion (Fig. 1B). The maximal flow velocity in an active observation chamber was
10 mm/s, corresponding in a shear stress of ~0.33 Pa at the surface of cell attached to the
substratum that was expected to result in a minimal mechanical stimulation of the cells.
Importantly, the flow velocity and the surface shear stress in the observation chamber remained
constant when the cAMP concentration was switched, excluding any possible change in the
mechanical stimulus. The availability of the 5 separate observation chambers made it possible
to repeat the cell stimulation with cAMP 5 times in a single experiment, thus increasing the
experimental throughput.

Fig S2. Membrane-associated RBD-GFP is inversely related to cytosolic RBD-GFP
fluorescence.

The cytosolic (red line) and the membrane fluorescence intensity following a sudden
increase in chemoattractant concentration at t=0 s.

Fig. S3. Responses in latrunculin-treated cells.

We quantified the degree of adaptation of Ras-GTP in cells treated with 15 µM latrunculin B by
exposing previously unstimulated cells to different chemoattractant concentrations, ranging from
1.0 x 10-2 to 1.0 x 103 nM in 10-fold increments. The RBD-GFP cytosolic fluorescence intensity
I(t) as a function of time in cells treated with the 5 highest chemoattractant concentrations are
shown. As in the case for cells not treated with latrunculin B (Fig. 2A), the response increases
for increasing concentrations and the peak time, Tpeak, decreases with increasing concentration.

Fig. S4. Effects of different receptor populations.

Numerical dose response curves for cells with only low affinity (Kd=450 nM; red dashed lines) or
only high affinity (Kd=60 nM; blue dotted lines) receptors. Shown are the results without any prestimulus and with pre-stimulation with 100 nM chemoattractant. The solid curves are shown for
comparison and represent the results of simulations with the mixed receptor population
described in the main text.

Fig. S5. Response times for the different models.

We defined the response time for the integral control and the incoherent feedforward
model as the time between the half-peak value during the rise phase and the half-peak
value during the decay phase of the response. In the integral control model, this
response time increased as the stimulus size was increased (red line). In contrast, the
response time decreased for increasing step sizes in the incoherent feedforward model
(black line), consistent with experimental results (symbols).

Fig. S6. Possible integral control topologies.

(A to H) All possible three-node topologies containing a negative feedback loop (integral control
topologies), including ones that are biologically not plausible. The dynamics of topologies (B)
and (C) are qualitatively similar to the one depicted in A and are discussed in the main text. In
the topologies of (A), (B), and (C), either RasGEF or activated Ras activates RasGAP which, in
turn, exerts negative feedback. Through explicit numerical simulations, we have verified that
these three topologies are inconsistent with the experiments for the reasons described in the
main text: The timescale of the return to basal amount following an increase in cAMP is
proportional to the magnitude of the stimulus. The qualitative dynamics of topologies (D) to (F)
are shown in (G) and the corresponding dose-response curves are plotted in (H). The
topologies of (D) to (F) have an inhibitory coupling between either RasGEF or activated Ras and
RasGAP. The feedback loop is closed through a positive link between RasGAP and RasGEF or
activated Ras. These topologies are also inconsistent with the experimental findings. In
particular, for large values of the stimulus, Ras-GTP saturates and remains close to its maximal

value for a prolonged period of time (G). This would result in experiments with a prolonged
plateau in the RBD-GFP intensity. Furthermore, the saturability of Ras-GTP makes it impossible
to obtain the dynamic range observed in the dose-response experiments. Specifically, it is
possible to obtain a dose-response curve that is close to the experimental one for untreated
cells. However, because for large values of the chemoattractant concentration Ras-GTP is
saturated, the response to an increased stimulus of cells that were pre-treated with a large
chemoattractant concentration is small. This is shown in (H), in which we plot the doseresponse curves for different values of initial chemoattractant concentrations. There is a small
response of cells pre-treated with 100 nM chemoattractant (blue line) to subsequent increases
in chemoattractant concentrations, inconsistent with the experimental results.

Fig. S7. Possible incoherent feedforward topologies.

Theoretically possible implementations, including ones that are biologically not plausible,
of the incoherent feedforward model. The topology in (A) is the one considered in this
study.

Fig. S8. Core model topologies.

Basic motifs of incoherent feedforward model (A) and integral control (negative feedback)
model [(B) and (C)]. S is the input signal, and X is the output.

Fig. S9. Comparison of the response in a spatially uniform and spatially extended model.

The intensity of cytosolic RBD-GFP, normalized by RBDcyt before simulation, as a function of
time following a sudden increase in chemoattractant from 0 to 1 µM for the spatially uniform
model governed by ODEs (solid line) and the spatially extended model described by PDEs
(symbols). The common parameters for both models are given in Table S1 and the additional
parameters for the spatially extended model are: DGAP=30µm2/s, DRBD=10µm2/s,
on
= 3µ m / s .
kGAP

Table S1. Model parameters used in this study.

parameter

value

parameter

value

R1tot

0.1

k-GEF

0.4 sec-1

R2tot

0.9

kGAP

0.01 sec-1

kR1

0.00267 nM-1sec-1

k-GAP

0.1 sec-1

k-R1

0.16 sec-1

Rastot

1

kR2

0.00244 nM-1sec-1

kRas

390 sec-1

k-R2

1.1 sec-1

k-Ras

3126 sec-1

r1

0.012 nM

RBDtot

1

r2

0.115 nM

off
kRBD

0.53 sec-1

kGEF

0.04 sec-1

on
kRBD

1.0 sec-1

References

1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.

W. Ma, A. Trusina, H. El-Samad, W. A. Lim, C. Tang, Defining network topologies that can achieve
biochemical adaptation. Cell 138, 760 (Aug 21, 2009).
J. Das et al., Digital signaling and hysteresis characterize ras activation in lymphoid cells. Cell 136,
337 (Jan 23, 2009).
M. Ueda, Y. Sako, T. Tanaka, P. Devreotes, T. Yanagida, Single-molecule analysis of chemotactic
signaling in Dictyostelium cells. Science 294, 864 (2001).
P. J. M. van Haastert, R. J. W. de Wit, Demonstration of receptor heterogeneity and affinity
modulation by nonequilibrium binding experiments. The cell surface cAMP receptor of
Dictyostelium discoideum. J. Biol. Chem. 259, 13321 (1984).
W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, B. P. Flannery, Numerical Recipes: The Art of
Scientific Computing. (Cambridge University Press, ed. 3rd, 2007), pp. 1256.
C. A. Parent, P. N. Devreotes, A cell's sense of direction. Science 284, 765 (1999).
C. Simonnet, A. Groisman, Chaotic mixing in a steady flow in a microchannel. Phys Rev Lett 94,
134501 (Apr 8, 2005).

