THEJOURNALOF BIOLOGICAL
CHEMISTRY
0 1988 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

Vol. 263,No. 28, Issue of October 5,pp. 14538-14543,1988
Printed in U.S.A.

Ligand-induced Phosphorylation ofthe cAMP Receptor from
Dictyostelium discoideum"
(Received for publication, June 6, 1988)

Roxanne A. Vaughan and PeterN. Devreotes
From the Departmentof Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University Schoolof Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland21205

The cell surface cAMP receptor of Dictyostelium mentally regulated genes. If cAMP is absent or present at
discoideum exists as a doublet of low (D) and high (R) fixedlevels,gene expression is abnormal and cells do not
electrophoretic mobility forms, both of which are phos- differentiate (8). Thus both activation and adaptation mephorylated in vivo. The R form is phosphorylated in a diated by the cell surface cAMP receptor are required for
ligand-independent manner, whileconversion of the R chemotaxis and normal development.
to Dforms, induced by the chemoattractant,is accomThe cell surface receptor which binds extracellular cAMP
panied by at least a 4-fold increase in the level of has been identified (9, 10) and purified to homogeneity (11).
phosphorylation. When cells are stimulated with satu- It exists as adoublet with the higher electrophoretic mobility
rating levels of CAMP, increased phosphorylation is form or R form ( A I r = 40,000) predominating in nonstimulated
detectable within 5 s and reaches maximum levels by
cells and the lower electrophoretic mobility form or D form
5 min with atn of 45 s. Dephosphorylation of receptor,
initiated by removal of the stimulus, is detectable ( A I r = 43,000) predominating in CAMP-stimulated cells. The
within 30 s, has a half-time of 2 min, and reaches a modification producing the change in forms is reversible and
plateau by 20 min. At half-maximal occupancy, phos- occurs endogenously as cells undergo spontaneous cAMP
phorylation occurred more slowly than at saturation, oscillations (12). In contrast to the transientCAMP-activated
responses listed above, the electrophoretic mobility shift pert H = 1.5 min, and remainedat intermediate levels until
the cAMP concentration wasincreased. Accompanying sists in the presence of constant cAMP (13) and may therefore
electrophoretic mobility shifts occurred in all
cases be involved in adaptation. The kinetics and dose dependence
with similar,though not identical, kinetics. Both phos- of thisshift have previously been analyzed by 8-N3-[32P]
phorylation andmobility shift werehalf-maximal at 5 CAMP' photoaffinity labeling and correlate well with the
nM cAMP and saturated at 100 nM. Estimation of the kinetics and dose dependence of adaptation of adenylate
specific activity of each receptor form indicates that cyclase and cell shape change (13).
not all sites are phosphorylated during the R to D
Metabolic labeling studies have shown thatthe cAMP
transition; at least half of the sitesare phosphorylated receptor is phosphorylated in uiuo and that thelevel of phosafter the transitionis completed. The rate of incorpo- phorylation is increased severalfold after cells are stimulated
ration of phosphates into the receptor, held in the D with cAMP (14, 15). Since both receptor shift and phosphoform by CAMP, was less than one-third the rate of rylation are induced by chemoattractant, phosphorylation
ligand-induced incorporation starting with theR form may be the biochemical event producing the shift and may
and was approximately twice thebasal rate of incor- also be an early event leading to adaptation. The cAMP
poration. These results are compatible with ligandreceptor thus resembles many other cell surface receptors
induced receptor phosphorylation being an earlyevent
such as thosefor insulin, epidermal growth factor, rhodopsin,
in the adaptationof other CAMP-induced responses.
and adrenergic agonists which undergo phosphorylation in
response to ligand binding (16, 17). For rhodopsin and the padrenergic receptor, ligand-induced phosphorylation has been
During the developmental cycle of Dictyostelium dkcoideum correlated with adaptation of physiological responses (17)
many thousands of amoebae aggregate to form a multicellular although definitive proof of this relationship is still lacking.
structure. Aggregation is mediated by cAMP which is propa- Thisstudy investigates phosphorylation properties of the
gated at 6-min intervals in the form of waves throughout the cAMP chemoattractant receptor including kinetics, dose decell population (1).Binding of cAMP to thecell surface elicits pendence, dephosphorylation, relationship to mobility shift,
a variety of responses including activation of adenylate cy- and compatibility with adaptation processes.
clase, phosphorylation of myosin heavy and light chains, and
cell shape changes (2-5). After characteristic periods of time
MATERIALS AND METHODS
these processes spontaneously return to basal levels even in
Cell Growth and Deuelopment"AX3 cells were grown to a density
the presence of CAMP, a process termed adaptation (5, 6).
of 5 X 106/ml in HL-5 medium and developed a t 2 X lO'/ml in
Removal of cAMP results in the resensitization, or deadap- development buffer as described (11).Cells were pulsed with 50 nM
tation, of these events (7). Activation and adaptation of these cAMP every 6 min throughout development.
Preparation of Membranes and in Vivo 3zPLabeling-After develprocesses are presumed to underlie the oscillatory propagation
5 h, cells were washed twice with and resuspended
of cAMP waves and chemotaxis of cells during aggregation. opment a t 21 "C for
The cAMP oscillations control the expression of develop- at 10' cells/ml in Mes buffer (20 mM Mes, pH 6.2, 2 mM MgSOd, 0.2

* This work was supported by Grant GM 34933 from the United
States Public Health Service (to P. N. D.).T h e costs of publication
of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges.
This article must therefore
be hereby marked "aduertisement" in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

mM CaC12).The cells were shaken a t 100 rpm and treated with5 m M
caffeine for 15 min to prevent activation of adenylate cyclase and
produce the R form of receptor (12). Where i n d i ~ a t e d ~was
~ P included
,

The abbreviations used are: 8-N3-[32P]cAMP, 8-azid0-[~*P]cyclic
AMP; Mes, 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonicacid.

14538

This is an Open Access article under the CC BY license.

Ligand-induced CAMPReceptor Phosphorylation

14539

phosphorylation, the maximal total phosphorylation (summing peak
at the same time as the
caffeine at a final concentration of 1.0 mCi/
ml. When stimulated, cells were then given 10 mM dithiothreitol and heights of R and D forms) in each experiment is considered to be
loo%, and other data points are expressed as percentages
of the
the indicated concentrationsof CAMP for the indicated timeperiods.
?'Pi labeling times prior to stimulationwere 15 min unless otherwise maximum value. Unless otherwise indicated, data points represent
the fractional amount of phosphorylation of the sum of R and D
indicated and were kept constant within g o u p s of experiments in
order to produce similar basal phosphorylation levels. These experi- forms.
ments were performed under conditions where ["PIATP pools were
not equilibrated.However, using the conditionsdescribed the specific
RESULTS
activity of the ["PIATP does not change appreciably during the time
course of these experiments or in response to cAMP (data not shown Kinetics of Phosphorylation-The kinetics of receptor re(18)). All labelings and cAMP stimulationswere performed at 22 "C. distribution determined by immunoblotting in response to
After stimulation cells were withdrawn to a 5-fold volume of icesaturating cAMP are shown in Fig. L4. As previously demcold saturatedammoniumsulfateandcentrifugedin
a Beckman
Microfuge 12 a t 10,000 rpm for 8 min. The pellets were resuspended onstrated by photoaffinity labeling (13), about 90% of receptor
with 1 ml of ammonium sulfate and recentrifuged. Cells were lysed protein from unstimulated cells migrates as theR form. When
by the addition of 1 ml of lysis buffer (11)and membranes prepared cells were stimulatedwith
M cAMPthere was arapid
and solubilized as described (11).For all experiments, parallel sets of redistribution of receptor protein from the R to the D form
RzPi-labeled and unlabeled cells were prepared in order to directly
with a final distribution of 80-90% in the D form. The halfcompare changes in phosphorylation (analyzedby immunoprecipitatime
for this process was 30 s, and a steady statewas reached
tion) and electrophoretic mobility shift (analyzed
by immunoblotby 5 min. No change in electrophoreticmobility was detected
ting).
during the remainder of the experiment. The kinetics of in
Experimental Protocok-For phosphorylation kinetics, cells were
washed, treated withcaffeine, and labeled with 32Pias described above. vivo phosphorylation of the cAMP receptor are shown in Fig.
For 0-min time points, aliquots were removed to ammonium sulfate
before cAMP stimulation. After addition of CAMP, aliquots of cells
I
wereremoved t o ammonium sulfate at the indicated time points.
1.0
Control experiments showed that, once in ammonium sulfate, cells
E
could be held without further processing for at least 30 min with no
b
LL
change in receptor shiftor level of phosphorylation.
0
For dephosphorylation experiments, cells a t a density of 108/ml
C
._
were labeled with "Pi and stimulated with 3 X lo" M cAMP for 15
C
.o
0.5'
min to produce the D form. The cells were then washed twice with
0
and resuspended a t 2 X 1O8/ml in 0 "C Mes buffer. To initiate the D
eLL
to R transition, cells were diluted 4-fold into 22 "C Mes buffer and
shaken a t 100 rpm. Aliquots were removed to ammonium sulfatefor
processingbefore dilutionand at intervalsthereafter.Since
the
1 .
I
8
washes for removal of cAMP also removed some of the 32Pifrom the
0
5
IO
Minutes
suspension, additional assayswere performed to distinguish between
"Pi loss from receptor dueto decreasing [3ZP]ATPpools and loss due
I
I
t o receptoroccupancychanges.Forallexperimentaltimepoints,
control samples were taken from 32Pi-labeled cells which were never
stimulated but were carried through the washes and dilutions to
assess R form phosphorylation changes and from cells which were
stimulated, washed, and diluted into
22 "C buffer containing3 X lo-'
M cAMP to determine the changes in phosphorylation
of the D form.
By determining the extentof these changes it waspossible to determine the phosphorylation changes due only to the
removal of the
CAMP.
T o determine the steady-state turnover rate for phosphates on the
Dform,cellswere
treatedwith
M cAMP for5 mintoproduce
I .
the phosphorylated D form, and32Piwas then added to the suspension.
0
5
10
A parallel set of cells was pretreated with "Pi and then given cAMP
Minutes
to determine the stimulus-induced phosphorylation rate. The protocol
allowed sufficient time after cAMP stimulationfor receptor to reach
C 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 P 9 1 0
steady-state phosphorylation and electrophoretic mobility shift
levels
before the addition of 32Pi(for the experimental regimen)or removal
of cells to ammonium sulfate (for the control regimen). Two other
sets of cells were analyzed for R form phosphorylation utilizing the
same protocol with the omission of the cAMP stimulus. In allcases
aliquots of cells were removed to ammonium sulfate for processing
after 10,20, and40 min of labeling with32Pi.All procedures were also
performed on unlabeled cells, and receptor shift was analyzed by
immunoblotting.
Immunoprecipitation and Zmrn~noblots-~~Pi-labeled
sodium dodecyl sulfate-solubilized membranes were centrifuged in a Beckman
FIG. 1. Kinetics of receptor modification induced by satuAirfuge for 15 min to remove insoluble material. Immunoblotting
rating CAMP. Parallel sets of cells were treated with caffeine, with
showed that no receptor was lost by this treatment. The supernatants
or withoutnzPilabeling, for 45 min priorto stimulation. Each set was
were then immunoprecipitated and subjected to electrophoresis on
then stimulated with10" M CAMP, and aliquotswere removed at the
10% polyacrylamide gels as described (14) with the exception that
the receptor was eluted from the final pelletof protein A-Sepharose indicated times. A, kinetics of receptor shift determined by immunoblotting. The graph shows the combined results
of two independent
of a t 95 "Cfor5min.
CL-4B beads at 22 "C for 10 min instead
of one of these
Immunoblots of unlabeled membranes were performed as described experiments. The insetshows theWesternblot
experiments in which the lanes contain samples taken a t times 0, 5,
(14).
Analysis of Data-Autoradiographs of immunoblots and immuno- 15, 25, 35, 45, 60, 120, 300, and 600 s after addition of CAMP. B,
kinetics of receptor phosphorylation. The graph shows the combined
precipitations were scannedwith an LKB densitometer,andthe
heights of R and D peaks were measured. For immunoblots, data are results of two independent experiments.C,autoradiograph of immupresented as the fractionof receptor in theD form, which equals the noprecipitated "Pi-labeled receptor taken after cAMP stimulationat
(height of D)/(height of D + height of R). Forquantitation of the times listed in panelA.

1;

.-

Ligand-induced cAMP Receptor Phosphorylation

14540

1B. As previously reported (14), there is a basal amount of assays were performed to determine the changes in R and D
receptor phosphorylation in unstimulated cells. After stimu- form phosphorylation levels due solely to thereduction in the
lation of cells by cAMP there was a dramatic increase in the specific activity of the [32P]ATP poolscaused by the cell
amount of receptor phosphorylation concomitant with the washes needed to remove the CAMP.In four separate experishift to the Dform. Ligand-inducedreceptor phosphorylation ments, reduction in phosphorylation levels of R and D forms
was detectable within 5 s after stimulation, was complete by due to the washes and dilution were not detectable until 10
5 min, and occurred with a half-time of 45 s. The process was min after the cells were diluted into the 22 "Cbuffer. At 10
biphasic with a rapid component occurring early (60-70% min the average reduction was 10% of the initial phosphorylmaximum phosphorylation by 1 min) followed by a slower ation level, at 15 min it was 19%, andat 20 min it was 30%.
component. No increase or decrease in phosphorylation was The data points shown in Fig. 2B have beencorrected for this
detectable after the steady state was achieved. Fig. 1C shows 32Piloss and thus represent dephosphorylation due only to
one of the autoradiographs of immunoprecipitated 32Pi-labeled removal of CAMP.Dephosphorylation of receptor induced by
receptor used to generate Fig. 1B anddemonstrates the spec- removal of the ligand was detectable by 30 s, had a half-time
ificity of the antiserum. The region shown includes proteins of 2 min, and reached a plateau by 20 min. The process was
of M,200,000-10,000. The autoradiographs of immunoprecip- biphasic with a rapid component occurring between 0 and 3
itations and immunoblots of all experiments described here min and a slower component occurring thereafter. Residual
showed similar high specificity, and therefore only the region amounts of phosphorylated D form were still present at 30
from 38 to 45 kDa is shown in other figures.
and 45 min after removal of cAMP (not shown).
Kinetics of Dephosphorylation-To examine the effects of
Dose Response to CAMP-The dependence of receptor shift
removal of CAMP,cells were first stimulated with cAMP for and phosphorylation on cAMP concentration are shown in
10 min, washed at 0 "C, and warmed rapidly by dilution into Fig. 3. Half-maximal shift occurred at 5nM CAMP,and satu22 "CMes bufferwithout CAMP.(Immunoblotting, as well as ration occurred at 100 nM. Little orno receptor shift occurred
previous photoaffinity labeling (13), showed that no D to R below 1 nM. Phosphorylation was also half-maximal at aptransition occurs when cells are held at 0 'C even in the proximately 5 nM and saturated at 100 nM. The experiments
absence of CAMP.) The redistribution from the D to the R shown in Fig. 4 demonstratethat the10-min stimulation time
form is shown in Fig. 2A. It was detectable by 30 s, occurred used was adequate for receptor shift and phosphorylation to
with a half-time of 2.5 min, and was complete by 10 min. The reach steady state at subsaturating cAMP concentrations.
Kinetics at a Subsaturating CAMPConcentration-During
concurrent dephosphorylation of the receptor is shownin Fig.
2B. As described under "Materials and Methods," control
I.o
0

E

2

.-C
C
0
._
*

0.5

e

0

L

LL

I I

0

0

I

5

5

I

I

10
Minutes

15

10
Minutes

15

.

I

20

0 -10

*
-9

-8

-7

-6

log [CAMP]

20

I

FIG. 2. Kinetics of receptor demodification
after removal of
CAMP.Cells with or without 32Pilabeling were treated with 3 X 10"
M cAMP for 10 min to produce the D form of the receptor and then
washed by centrifugation a t 0 "C to remove the CAMP. Cells were
then diluted into 22 "C Mes buffer to initiate demodification, and
aliquots were taken at theindicated times. A, kinetics of D to R shift
determined by immunoblotting. The inset shows the Western blot of
an experiment in which samples were taken a t 0,2, 5, 10, 15, and 20
min after dilution into 22 "C Mes. The results from two experiments
are shown. B, kinetics of dephosphorylation. The inset shows the
autoradiograph of immunoprecipitated 32Pi-labeledreceptor taken a t
the times listed for panel A. 32Piloss from both R and D forms due to
the washes was estimated as described under "Materials and Methods," and those values have been incorporated as correction factors
to the actualdata. The results shown are from two independent
experiments.

0L'IOI

I

-9
I

- 81

-7I

I

-6

log [CAMP]

FIG. 3. Effect of CAMP concentration on receptor modification. Parallel sets of cells were prepared with or without 32Pi
labeling for 45 rnin. At that time cells were stimulated with the
indicated concentrations of cAMP for 10 min and then removed for
processing, A, dose response of receptor shift determined by immunoblotting. The graph shows the results from four independent experiments. The inset shows the immunoblot of one experiment in
which the lanescontain samples from cells stimulated with the
following concentrations of CAMP:0, 0.1, 1, 2, 5, 10,20, 50, 100, and
1000 nM. B, dose response of receptor phosphorylation. The graph
shows the results of two experiments. The inset shows the autoradiograph of immunoprecipitated 32Pi-labeledreceptors prepared from
cells stimulated with the doses shown in p a n e l A.

14541

Phosphorylation
Receptor
Ligand-induced
cAMP

Mlnutes

I 1

0

I

5

I

IO

I

15

io

Minutes

FIG. 4. Kinetics of receptor modification at a subsaturating
dose. Parallel sets of cells were prepared with or without 3zPilabeling
for 45 min. Each set was then stimulated with 5 nM CAMP, and
aliquots were removed at the indicated times. After the last time
point was taken the remaining cells were stimulated with 10" M
cAMP for 3 additional minutes. The graphs show the averages of two
independent experiments. A, kinetics of receptor shift determined by
immunoblotting. The inset shows one of the immunoblots used to
generate the graph. The lanes contain samples taken at times 0,0.17,
0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 15, and 20 min afterstimulation. The finallane
corresponding to the point labeled C on the graph is the sample
prepared from cells stimulated with the saturating dose. B , kinetics
of receptor phosphorylation. The inset shows the autoradiograph of
immunoprecipitated 32Pi-labeledreceptors taken at the same time
points shown in panel A. The final lane is the sample prepared from
cells stimulated with the saturatingdose.

adaptation, responsivenessto subsaturating concentrations of
stimuli is lost, but cells remain responsive to higher stimulus
concentrations. Therefore, phosphorylation was examined at
5 nM CAMP,a concentration which produces an intermediate
level of receptor shift and phosphorylation. Fig. 4A shows
that at5 nM CAMP,the transition occurs with a half-time of
1.5 min, reaches a steady state of 30% D form between 5 and
10 min, and remains at thatlevel forup to 20 min. Increasing
the cAMP concentration to lo-' M for 3 min at that time
resulted in an increase in D form to 55%. Phosphorylation
also reached an intermediate steady-state level at 5 nM cAMP
(Fig. 4B).This occurred with a half-time of 1.5 min, reached
a plateau level of 60% maximum by 5 min, and remained
constant for 15 additional min. Increasing the cAMP concenM for 3 min at that time resulted in a further
tration to
increase in receptor phosphorylation.
Turtwuer of Phosphates on Receptor-The rate of incorporation of phosphates into the pre-existing D form of receptor
was investigated. Cells were treated with cAMP for 5 min to
allow receptor phosphorylation to reach steady-state levels as
shown in Fig. 1. 32Piwas then added to thecells, and aliquots
were removed forprocessing after 10, 20, and 40 min of total
labeling time. The standard stimulus-induced rate of phosphorylation was determined in parallel by preincubating cells
with 32Pifor 5 min, adding CAMP,and removing aliquots at
10, 20, and 40 min after addition of 32Pi.The rate of R form
phosphorylation was determined under the same conditions
with the exception of the addition of CAMP. Data are ex-

pressed as the amount of phosphate in the D or R form
relative to themaximum levelof total phosphorylation in the
stimulus-induced sample. Because the 32Pilabeling times in
this experiment are short, the data obtained reflect relative
rates of phosphate incorporation into Dor R forms under the
various conditions. The differences observedbetween the
samples are not due to ligand-inducedvariations in [32P]ATP
pools becausecAMP does not affect [32P]ATP
pools overthe
duration of the stimulus used here (data notshown) (18).
Panel A of Fig. 5 shows the relative rates of 32Piincorporation into the D form induced by stimulus (closed circles)
and when the receptor pre-exists in the D form (open circles).
The results indicate that when receptor is held in the Dform,
the rate of phosphorylation is about 3 times less than the
stimulus-induced rate of phosphorylation beginning with the
R form. Fig. 5B shows that phosphorylation of the R form
was linear with respect to time and was not affected by the
addition of the other reagents ("Pi, dithiothreitol, and caffeine). The rate of R form phosphorylation is about one-fifth
the stimulus-induced rateand about one-half therate of
incorporation into pre-existing D form.
To assess the turnover of ligand-induced phosphorylation
sites, R form phosphorylation should be subtracted from that
e
._
1.0-

-2.

l

I

1

--

A

L

I

I

1

B

0

0

r

a
VI

0

S

a

0

I

IO

20

_

40

Minutes

Minutes

FIG. 5. Turnover of phosphate on receptor. A, cells were
treated with caffeine for 10 min and labeled with 32Pifor the times

were
) labeled with 32Pifor 5 min
indicated. Control cells (M
before stimulation with lo" M cAMP while experimental cells (0-0) were stimulated with lo-' McAMP for 5 min hefore labeling
with 32Pi.Data points are expressed as percent of maximum control
value and are obtained from two independent experiments. B, cells
were treated with the same regimen as in panel A except that no
control regimen; o"-o,
experimental
cAMP was given. M,
regimen.
I

.

0

.

5
Minutes

FIG. 6. Specific activity of D form after cAMP stimulation.
The data shown in Fig. 1 were used to calculate the specific activity
of 32Pi-labeledD form. The amount of 32Piin the D form a t each time
point (relative to 100% as described under "Materials and Methods")
was determined by densitometric scanning. This amount (as a percent) was divided by the fraction of receptor in D form at that time
point (also a percent)as determined by immunoblotting.

14542

Ligand-induced CAMP
Phosphorylation
Receptor

of the D form since it is assumed to proceed independently of rylation is a function of receptor occupancy. At 5 nM CAMP,
the stimulus. When this correction is made, the incorporation a concentrationat which receptors are incompletely occupied,
rate of ligand-induced phosphorylation sites on pre-existing receptor phosphorylation reaches only a fraction of the maxD form is approximately one-fifth the stimulus-induced rate imal level. Steady state was achieved between 5 and 10 min
of phosphate incorporation.
after stimulation, and no further change in phosphorylation
Specific Activity of D Form-The data from the experiments level occurred as long as the stimulus was held constant. A
shown in Fig. 1 were used to estimate the changes in specific subsequent increase in the proportion of occupied receptors
activity of receptor D form following cAMP stimulation. produced further receptor phosphorylation. Both adenylate
Specific activity is defined as the fractional amount of phos- cyclase and myosin phosphorylation respond to step increases
phorylation of the D form at each time point divided by the in cAMP in the same manner, i.e. a subsaturating dose of
fraction of receptor protein in the D form at each time point CAMPproduces a submaximal response (which in these cases
(Fig. 6). At 5-15 s after addition of stimulus, the specific then subsides), andafurther
increase in cAMP stimulus
activity of the D form is about 40% of the maximum value. produces a further response (5, 7).
This value increases rapidly to about 80% of maximum by 1
The kinetics of shift andphosphorylation also depended on
min and reaches a plateau at the maximum level between 3 the stimulus dose. At 5 nM CAMP, the tlh for shiftand
and 5 min. (The curve levels off above a value of 1.00 because phosphorylation were 2.5 and 1.5 min, respectively, compared
the fractional value of phosphorylation of D form at the later to 30 and 45 s at
M. Receptor shift at
and lo-' M
time points was very close to 1.00, while receptor protein in cAMP was even more rapid than at
M (data not shown).
the D form equilibrated at 0.80-0.90.)
This agrees with experiments showing that the rateof rise of
adaptation is faster with higher doses of cAMP (6). In all of
DISCUSSION
these respects, receptor phosphorylation characteristics are
Receptors isolated from resting cells migrate with an elec- similar to properties ascribed to atheoreticaladaptation
trophoretic mobility on sodium dodecyl sulfate gels of M , mechanism proposed in several models (6,23).
Receptor shift, analyzed by immunoblotting, was assessed
40,000 and show ligand-independent incorporation of 32Pi
which is linear for at least 1 h. Stimulation of cells with cAMP in parallel with phosphorylation changes. The kinetics of both
results in a rapid and dramatic increase in 32Piincorporation processes upon addition and removal of cAMP were similar
into thereceptor concomitant with a change in its electropho- but not identical, while the dose dependence of each was
retic mobility to M , 43,000. The cAMP dependence of these essentially the same. At subsaturatingcAMP levels both
processes is a result of receptor occupancy rather than a receptor shift and phosphorylstion were maintained at a
process activated by intracellular cAMP because phosphoryl- fractional level untilthe stimulusconcentration was ination and shift occur in the presence of caffeine which pre- creased. The two processes thus have very similar charactervents activation of adenylate cyclase (19). Dephosphorylation istics, but a causal relationship between the two remains to
of receptor was also highly sensitive to receptor occupancy, be unequivocably established.
Analysis of the specific activity of receptor phosphorylation
occurring rapidly when cAMP was removed.The cAMP receptorthus resembles rhodopsin and ,&adrenergic receptors revealed that the specific activity of the D form increased
which are also phosphorylated and dephosphorylated in re- during the course of the experiment (Fig. 6). At early time
points after stimulation the specific activity of the D form
sponse to receptor occupancy (20).
Several lines of evidence support the hypothesis that was 30-40% of the maximum value, and maximum levels of
CAMP-inducedreceptor phosphorylation is an early step lead- phosphorylation were not obtained until 3-5 min after stiming to adaptation of one or more CAMP-stimulated events. ulation. This result suggests that phosphorylation of receptor
The kinetics of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation are continues after the R to D transition is complete. We have
comparable with the kinetics of adaptation and deadaptation estimated the molar ratio of phosphates to protein in the R
of several processes. Ligand-induced receptor phosphoryla- and D forms to be 0.2 0.1 and 4.0 k 0.8 (14), suggesting
tion is rapid, with detectable levels present at 5 s after that numerous sites on the D form are phosphorylated. It is
stimulation and steady state being reached by 5 min. Adap- possible that one or two sites are phosphorylated during the
tation of adenylate cyclase, myosin phosphorylation, and cell R to D transition, and theremainder is phosphorylated only
shape changes begin within seconds of application of chemo- after the receptor is in the D form. Experimentsare in
attractant and are completed within 3-5 min (5, 6, 15). The progress to identify the multiple ligand-dependent and -inhalf-time for phosphorylation, 1.5 min, is also comparable to dependent phosphorylation sites and todetermine their relathe half-times for adaptation of these processes (2-3 min). tionship to the mobility shift and their contributions to the
Dephosphorylation of receptor upon removal of cAMP had a overall kinetic properties. It will be interesting to learn
half-time of 2 min and reached a plateau by 20 min, while whether all, some, or one of the phosphorylation sites are
adenylate cyclase deadapts with a half-time of 2-4 min and is involved in adaptation or if phosphorylation of different sites
completed at about 12 min (6, 7, 21). In addition, adaptation is involved with adaptation of different processes.
Incorporation of phosphateinto receptor is most rapid
and deadaptation of these processes as well as phosphorylationand dephosphorylation of receptor occur in caffeine- during the R to D transition. Steady-state turnover of phostreated cells (5,22), indicating that none of these processes is phate on the D form is estimated to be one-fifth to one-third
the stimulus-induced rate. Nevertheless, the presence of dedependent upon increases in intracellular CAMP.
The dose responses for these processes are very similar. tectable phosphate incorporation into the D form at steady
Receptor phosphorylation was half-maximal at 5 nM cAMP state indicates that itundergoes cycles of dephosphorylationand saturated at 100 nM CAMP. Many CAMP-induced proc- rephosphorylation and that thereis a phosphatase capable of
known
esses are activated by nanomolar CAMP,including adenylate dephosphorylating occupied receptors. It isnot
cyclase (Kd = 5 nM) and myosin phosphorylation (& = 5 whether or not this phosphatase activity is the same as the
nM), while desensitization of adenylate cyclase also occurs one which dephosphorylates receptor after removal of stimulus or if there is a stimulus-dependent phosphatase.
with a Kd of 5 nM (21).
Several properties of ligand-induced phosphorylation of the
The fractional amount of steady-state receptor phospho-

*

Ligand-induced cAMP
Phosphorylation
Receptor
cAMP receptor from D. discoideum have been investigated.
In all respects examined in this study, i.e. events induced by
the addition of both saturating and subsaturating
stimuli,
events induced by the removal of stimulus, and changes as a
function of stimulus dose, receptor modification resulting in
electrophoretic mobility shift and receptor phosphorylation
occurred with similar properties. No conditions have been
found which dissociate receptor shift from phosphorylation,
although a causal relationship between the two remains to be
established. The similarities in kinetics and dose response
between receptor phosphorylation and adaptation of adenylate cyclase and myosin heavy and light chain phosphorylation
suggest that ligand-induced receptor phosphorylation is an
early event in the causal mechanism of one or more of these
processes.
Recent work has shown that transmembrane signal transduction processes in Dictyostelium are similar to those of
vertebrate cells. The deduced amino acid sequence of the
receptor shows significant homology to rhodopsin, and the
structural model based on hydrophobicity analysis indicates
that it is a member of the family of receptors with seven
membrane-spanning domains.' The proposed cytoplasmic C
terminuscontains 18 serinesand 9 threonines which are
potential phosphorylation sites. Light-induced phosphorylation of rhodopsin occurs primarily on a cluster of serines and
threonines near the carboxyl terminus (25), and theproposed
cytoplasmic tail of the P-adrenergic receptor is also serinethreonine-rich (26). Ligand-induced phosphorylation of these
receptors has also been correlated with functional adaptation
(16). In addition to these structural and functional similarities, activationof effector enzymes in Dictyostelium by extracellular cAMP occurs through the action of a G-protein (3,
24). These properties in conjunction with the ease of mutant
isolation and the recent advent of transformation by homologous recombination make Dictyostelium a powerful model
system for the investigation of signal transduction processes.
Acknowledgments-We thank Dr. Peter Van Haastert for helpful
discussions and suggestions during portions of this work, Drs. Peter
Klein, Maureen Pupillo, and Robert Gundersenfor reading the manuscript, and Peggy Ford for excellent secretarial assistance.

P. Klein, C. L. Saxe, 111, T. J. Sun, A.R. Kimmel, and P. N.
Devreotes, submitted for publication.

14543
REFERENCES

1. Tomchik, K., and Devreotes, P. (1981) Science 212,443-446
2. Konijn, T. (1970) Ezperientia 26, 367-369
3. Theibert, A., and Devreotes, P. (1986) J . Biol. Chem. 261,1512115125
4. Mato, J., Krens, F., Van Haastert, P., and Konijn, T. (1977) Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. A . 7 4 , 2348-2351
5. Berlot, C., Spudich, J., and Devreotes, P. (1985) Cell 43, 307314
6. Dinauer, M., Steck, T., and Devreotes, P. (1980) J. Cell Biol. 86,
554-561
7. Dinauer, M., Steck, T., and Devreotes, P. (1980) J. Cell Biol. 8 6 ,
545-553
8. Devreotes, P. (1982) in The Development of Dictyostelium discoideum (Loomis, W . F., ed) pp. 117-168, Academic Press, Orlando, FL
9. Juliani, M. H., and Klein, C. (1981) J. Biol. Chem. 256,613-619
10. Theibert, A.. Klein, P., and Devreotes, P. (1984) J. Biol. Chem.
2 5 9 , i2318-12321
11. Klein. P.. Knox. B.. Borleis.. J.., and Devreotes., P. (1987)
.
. J. Biol.
Chem. 262,352-357
12. Klein, P., Theibert, A,, Fontana, D., and Devreotes, P. (1985) J.
Biol. Chem. 260,1757-1763
13. Devreotes, P., and Sherring, J. (1985) J. Biol. Chem. 260,63786384
14. Klein, P., Vaughan, R., Borleis, J., and Devreotes, P. (1987) J.
Bwl. Chem. 262,358-364
15. Klein, P., Fontana, D., Knox, B., Theibert, A., and Devreotes, P.
(1985) Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Bwl. 5 0 , 787-799
16. Ullrich, A., Bell, J., Chen, E., Herrera, R., Petruzzelli, T., Dull,
T., Gray, A,, Coussens, L., Liao, Y-C., Tsubokawa, M., Mason,
P., Seberg, P., Grunfeld, G., Rosen, O., and Ramachandran, J.
(1985) Nature 3 1 3 , 756-761
17. Sibley, D., and Lef'kowitz, R. (1985) Nature 3 1 7 , 124-129
18. Berlot, C. (1987) Methods Cell Biol. 2 8 , 333-345
19. Brenner, M., and Thorns, S. (1984) Deu. Biol. 1 0 1 , 136-146
20. Benovic, J. L., Strasser, R. H., Caron, M. G., and Lefiowitz, R.
J. (1986) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. A . 8 3 , 2797-2801
21. Van Haastert, P. (1987) J. Biol. Chem. 262,7700-7704
22. Theibert, A., and Devreotes, P. N. (1983) J . Cell Biol. 97, 173177
23. Knox, B., Devreotes, P. N., Goldbeter, A., and Segel, L. A. (1986)
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S. A . 83, 2345-2349
24. Van Haastert, P. J. M., Snaar-Jagalska, B. E., and Janssens, P.
M. W . (1987) Eur. J. Biochem. 1 6 2 , 251-258
25. Thompson, P., and Findlay, J. B.C. (1984) Biochem. J. 2 2 0 ,
773-780
26. Dixon, R. A. F., Kobilka, B. K., Strader, D. J., Benovic, J. L.,
Dohlman, H. G., Frielle, T., Bolanowski, M. A., Bennet, C. D.,
Rands, E., Diehl, R. E., Mumford, R. A., Slater, E. E., Sigal, I.
S., Caron, M.G., Lef'kowitz, R. J., and Strader, C. D. (1986)
Nature 32 1, 75-79

