Molecular Biology of the Cell
Vol. 16, 676 – 688, February 2005

Quantitative Imaging of Single Live Cells Reveals
Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Multistep Signaling Events of
D □
V
Chemoattractant Gradient Sensing in Dictyostelium□
Xuehua Xu,* Martin Meier-Schellersheim,† Xuanmao Jiao,* Lauren E. Nelson,*
and Tian Jin*‡
Laboratories of *Immunogenetics and †Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852
Submitted July 1, 2004; Revised November 9, 2004; Accepted November 11, 2004
Monitoring Editor: Paul Matsudaira

Activation of G-protein– coupled chemoattractant receptors triggers dissociation of G␣ and G␤␥ subunits. These subunits
induce intracellular responses that can be highly polarized when a cell experiences a gradient of chemoattractant. Exactly
how a cell achieves this amplified signal polarization is still not well understood. Here, we quantitatively measure
temporal and spatial changes of receptor occupancy, G-protein activation by FRET imaging, and PIP3 levels by monitoring
the dynamics of PHCrac-GFP translocation in single living cells in response to different chemoattractant fields. Our results
provided the first direct evidence that G-proteins are activated to different extents on the cell surface in response to
asymmetrical stimulations. A stronger, uniformly applied stimulation triggers not only a stronger G-protein activation but
also a faster adaptation of downstream responses. When naı̈ve cells (which have not experienced chemoattractant) were
abruptly exposed to stable cAMP gradients, G-proteins were persistently activated throughout the entire cell surface,
whereas the response of PHCrac-GFP translocation surprisingly consisted of two phases, an initial transient and asymmetrical translocation around the cell membrane, followed by a second phase producing a highly polarized distribution
of PHCrac-GFP. We propose a revised model of gradient sensing, suggesting an important role for locally controlled
components that inhibit PI3Kinase activity.

INTRODUCTION
Chemotaxis, the directed movement of cells along gradients
of chemoattractants, plays an important role in many physiological processes such as neuronal patterning, the recruitment of leukocytes to sites of infection, and cell aggregation
in the life cycle of the social amoebae, Dictyostelium discoideum (Zigmond, 1978; Devreotes and Zigmond, 1988; Murphy, 1994; Segall, 1999; Meinhardt, 1999; Chung et al., 2001;
Iijima et al., 2002; Postma et al., 2004a, 2004b). Many of the
key molecules and biochemical events regulating such responses have been identified. Chemoattractant signaling is
mediated by seven-transmembrane receptors that are linked
to heterotrimeric G-proteins (GPCR) (Devreotes and Zigmond, 1988; Murphy, 1994; Thelen, 2001; Devreotes and
Janetopoulos, 2003). Ligand binding to the receptors induces
the dissociation of the G-proteins into G␣ and G␤␥ subunits.
Free G␤␥ plays a role in the activation of PI3K, which
phosphorylates inositol phospholipids of the inner plasma
membrane (Stoyanov et al., 1995; Hazeki et al., 1998; Segall,
1999; Hirsch et al., 2000; Li et al., 2000; Sasaki et al., 2000;
Rickert et al., 2000; Stephens et al., 2002). Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-diphosphate (PIP2) is highly abundant and plays a
Article published online ahead of print in MBC in Press on November 24, 2004 (http://www.molbiolcell.org/cgi/doi/10.1091/mbc.
E04-07-0544).
□
D □
V
The online version of this article contains supplemental material at MBC Online (http://www.molbiolcell.org).
‡

Corresponding author. E-mail address: tjin@niaid.nih.gov.

676

key role in downstream effects of GPCR signaling because
the product of its 3-phosphorylation by PI3K, PI(3,4,5)P3
(PIP3), stimulates cellular processes through its ability to
bind proteins with pleckstrin homology (PH) domains and
thereby recruit them to the plasma membrane (Kavran et al.,
1998), such as Cytosolic Regulator of Adenylyl Cyclase
(CRAC) and protein kinase B (Akt/PKB; Insall et al., 1994;
Parent et al., 1998; Meili et al., 1999; Servant et al., 2000). The
phosphatase PTEN acts as a direct antagonist of PI3K, dephosphorylating PIP3 to generate PIP2 (Liliental et al., 2000;
Iijima and Devreotes, 2002; Funamoto et al., 2002; Comer and
Parent, 2002).
The biochemical responses can show a high degree of
spatial polarization if a cell experiences asymmetrical activation of chemoattractant receptors (Parent and Devreotes,
1999; Servant et al., 2000; Meili and Firtel, 2003). Translation
of small asymmetries in receptor occupancy into strong
intracellular signaling polarity enables the cells to respond
to very shallow gradients, as little as a 2% difference in
chemoattractant concentration between the front and back of
a migrating cell (Chung et al., 2001; Iijima et al., 2002; Devreotes and Janetopoulos, 2003; Postma et al., 2004a, 2004b).
Many proteins and lipids involved in chemotactic responses
are distributed asymmetrically in chemotaxing D. discoideum
amoebae and neutrophils that display clear morphological
polarity (Zigmond et al., 1981; Comer and Parent, 2002; Xu et
al., 2003). In these cells, chemoattractant receptors are uniformly distributed on the cell surface (Xiao et al., 1997;
Servant et al., 1999), the G-protein ␤␥ subunits are localized
in a shallow anterior to posterior gradient (Jin et al., 2000),
PI3K accumulates at the leading edge (Funamoto et al., 2001,

© 2005 by The American Society for Cell Biology

Signal Transduction Events and Chemotactic Responses

2002; Wang et al., 2002), PTEN is enriched at the trailing end
(Funamoto et al., 2002; Iijima and Devreotes, 2002), PH domain-containing proteins translocate from the cytosol to the
plasma membrane at the leading front (Parent et al., 1998;
Meili et al., 1999; Servant et al., 2000), and some small Gproteins localize in either the leading edge or the trailing end
(Xu et al., 2003). As a consequence, the front of a polarized
cell shows greater responsiveness to attractant than do the
sides and the trailing end (Zigmond et al., 1981; Jin et al.,
2000; Funamoto et al., 2002; Iijima and Devreotes, 2002), and
uniform stimulations can trigger localized PIP3 increases
(Postma et al., 2003, 2004a, 2004b).
Treatment with latrunculin, an inhibitor of actin polymerization, eliminates preexisting morphological polarity and
also prevents cell movement. However, the ability to detect
chemoattractant gradients is preserved (Parent et al., 1998;
Jin et al., 2000). This allows analysis of the gradient sensing
machinery in the absence of preexisting asymmetries in the
distribution of key signaling components. Studies in D. discoideum amoebae have shown that receptors and G-proteins
are uniformly distributed around the perimeter of latrunculin-treated cells and all points around the perimeter are
almost equally sensitive to cAMP, a chemoattractant for D.
discoideum. On spatially uniform cAMP exposure, PH domain– containing proteins evenly translocate to the plasma
membrane and then quickly return to the cytosol (a process
termed adaptation). In a cAMP gradient, although distributions of the receptors and G-proteins remain the same, some
PH domain-containing proteins are localized to the membrane in a polarized manner (Xiao et al., 1997; Parent et al.,
1998; Jin et al., 2000; Janetopoulos et al., 2004).
Models have been proposed to explain how cells achieve
such adaptation to uniform increases in chemoattractant
concentration while displaying persistent, spatially polarized responses to gradients (Parent and Devreotes, 1999;
Postma and Van Haastert, 2001; Iijima et al., 2002; Levchenko
and Iglesias, 2002; Rappel et al., 2002; Devreotes and Janetopoulos, 2003). Two key questions remain to be answered: At
which step of the signal transduction pathway are slight
differences in concentration of a chemoattractant across the
cell body amplified into sharply localized biochemical responses, and what is the dynamic process of the signal
amplification when a cell initially expose to a gradient?
In this study, we analyzed the dynamics of key aspects of
the gradient sensing pathway in single living cells using
confocal fluorescence microscopy with high spatio-temporal
resolution. We found that cAMP stimulation induced a local
and concentration-dependent activation of G-proteins
around the cell membrane and that G-proteins remained
dissociated at a steady-state level as long as cAMP was
present. Analysis of cells suddenly exposed to a steady
cAMP gradient revealed a two-step process of gradient sensing, consisting of first rapidly “switching on” the gradient
sensing machinery and then more slowly “amplifying” differences in receptor occupancy to achieve a highly polarized
PHCrac-GFP distribution. These new findings lead to a modified scheme of gradient sensing that can account for the
observed temporal and spatial dynamics of PHCrac-GFP and
provides the foundation for further quantitative modeling.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Lines and Cell Growth and Differentiation
The D. discoideum cell line expressing both G␣2CFP and YFPG␤ subunits,
which was described previously (Janetopoulos et al., 2001), was cloned by
limiting dilution to obtain high CFP- and YFP-expressing cell lines. Newly
obtained cell lines designated as G cells were cultured axenically in D3-T

Vol. 16, February 2005

Basic Media containing 20 ␮g/ml geneticin (Sigma, Steinheim, Germany). To
establish a PHCrac-GFP– expressing cell line, wild-type (AX2) cells were transformed with a linearized integration vector carrying a cassette encoding
PHCrac-GFP and the blasticidin S resistance gene. Transformants were selected in D3-T Basic Media (KD Medical, Columbia, MD) containing 10 ␮g/ml
blasticidin S sulfate (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and cloned by limiting dilution. Cell clones with a high level of cytosolic PHCrac-GFP expression were
selected, and their functionality and experimental utility were examined by
cAMP-mediated chemotaxis and cAMP-trigged PHCrac-GFP translocation.
The resultant cell lines were designated as JAX and called PH cells in this
study. Cell maintenance, transformation and development to the chemotactic
stage were carried out as previously described (Jin et al., 2000). Before being
observed, the cells were treated with 2.0 ␮M latrunculin B (Molecular Probes,
Eugene, OR).

Live Cell Imaging and Microscopic Analyses with LSM
510 META
Differentiated cells (2 ⫻ 104) were plated on a four-well chamber for uniformly applied stimulation and a one-well chamber for the microinjector
delivered cAMP stimulation (Nalge Nunc International, Naperville, IL), allowed to adhere to the cover glass for 10 min and then covered with DB
buffer. Live cells were imaged using a Zeiss Laser Scanning Microscope
(Thornwood, NY), LSM 510 META, with a 40⫻ NA 1.3 or 60⫻ NA 1.4 oil Dic
Plan-Neofluar objective. To monitor cAMP and PHCrac-GFP, the specimen
were excited with two laser lines, 488 nm for GFP and 543 nm for Alexa 594,
a water-soluble fluorescence dye. Images were simultaneously recorded in
three channels: channel one: fluorescent emissions from 505 to 530 nm for GFP
(green); channel two: emissions from 580 to 650 nm for Alexa 594 (red);
channel three: DIC.

Generation and Measurement of Applied cAMP
Stimulations
Live cells were imaged during stimulations with a uniform concentration, an
asymmetrical increase, or a steady gradient of cAMP. The temporal-spatial
intensity changes of Alexa 594 and PHCrac-GFP in cells were directly imaged
using a confocal microscope with Z-axis resolution of ⬃1–2 ␮m. Fluorescence
intensities of Alxea 594 and GFP within the focal plane were simultaneously
recorded in two different channels. To apply a uniform stimulation, 100 ␮l of a
mixture of cAMP and Alexa 594 hydrazide sodium salt (0.1 ␮g/␮l; Molecular
Probes) was dropped on top of cells placed in a four-well chamber (Nalge Nunc
International) and covered with 400 ␮l DB buffer. Under this experimental
condition, during the first minute, cells were uniformly exposed to a cAMP
concentration that was about 2.5-fold of the final concentration. For other stimulations, cells were plated in a one-well chamber and covered with 6 ml DB
buffer. To establish a steady gradient, we set FemtoJet (FemtoJet and micromanipulator 5171, Eppendorf, Germany) with Pc ⫽ 70 and Pi ⫽ 70 to ensure the
injection of a constant and small volume of cAMP and Alxea 594 into a one-well
chamber. Under this condition, a stable gradient was established within 100 ␮m
around the tip of the micropipette (Supplementary Figure S2). To suddenly
expose a cell to a stable gradient, a micropipette filled with a mixture of cAMP
and 0.1 g/␮l Alexa 594 linked with a FemtoJet was positioned 1000 ␮m away
from the cells and then was quickly moved to a position within 100 ␮m to the
cells. During the experiments, we only changed the distance between the micropipette and the cells. The speed of the movement determines how fast a stable
gradient can form around a cell. To generate a brief asymmetrical stimulation, a
small volume of cAMP mixture was injected into the chamber by applying a
pressure on the microinjector for 3 s. In the fluorescence resonance energy
transfer (FRET) experiments, where the cAMP was not monitored, we applied
the same conditions to ensure similar stimulations.

FRET Measurement
FRET allows us to examine the activity of biologically active proteins by
detecting changes in conformation of a protein or in the interaction of two
proteins that have been tagged with a FRET donor/acceptor pair, such as CFP
and YFP (Adams et al., 1991; Miyawaki, 2003; Sekar and Periasamy, 2003).
Using a spectral confocal fluorescence microscope, we used two methods to
measure FRET that indicate dissociation of G␣2CFP and YFPG␤: first, measuring intensity decrease of acceptor (YFP) and increase of donor (CFP) in
response to stimuli. This method measures cAMP-induced temporal G-protein dissociations in single living cells. We monitored intensity changes of
CFP (donor) and (YFP) acceptor after a stimulation using a time-lapse acquisition of Lambda Stacks. The cells were excited with a 454-nm laser-line, and
the spectral emissions in each pixel of the fluorescence images were simultaneously recorded in eight channels, each with a 10-nm width, from 464 to 544
nm. To separate multifluorescence signals, each of the fluorescence images
was collected using Lambda Stack acquisition. The spectral emissions of
fluorescence images were simultaneously recorded in a CHS-1 from 464 to 544
nm. The spectra of the cells expressing CFP, YFP, or GFP only were obtained
and used as the references for the Linear Unmixing Function. The digitally
separated images of CFP and YFP of the G cells and GFP of the PH cells were
obtained. The intensities of each fluorophore in the regions of interest in the

677

X. Xu et al.

Figure 1. Membrane translocation of
PHCrac-GFP in a living cell exposed to a uniform chemoattractant field. (A) PHCrac-GFP
translocation (green) after exposure to a uniform field of cAMP chemoattractant (red). A
cell expressing PHCrac-GFP (PH cell) was
stimulated with 10 nM cAMP at time 0. The
stimulation was imaged and quantified by
inclusion of a fluorescence dye, Alexa 594, in
the cAMP solution. Time (seconds) after
cAMP exposure is shown in the top left corner of each image. Supplementary Figure 1
and Supplementary Video video1.avi show a
complete sequence of GFP and Alexa intensity changes. Images were captured at 0.8-s
intervals and replayed at 5 frames/s. (B) Regions of interest (1– 4) used to assess concentration changes of cAMP with time in the
vicinity of the cell. (C) Quantitative measurement over time of the increase in cAMP in the
four regions of interest. (D) Regions of interest designated as the membrane (M) and the
cytosol (C) of the cell and used for assessing
cAMP-triggered redistribution of PHCracGFP, detected as intensity changes of green
fluorescence within a specified region. (E)
PHCrac-GFP membrane translocation between
the cytosol (C) and membrane (M) over time
after exposure to a uniform field of chemoattractant. Similar results were observed in
more than 20 independent experiments.
time-lapse experiments were measured, normalized, and expressed as a function of time in responses to cAMP stimulations, using the software of LSM510
META. Second, measuring intensity increase of the donor (CFP) flowing
photobleaching the acceptor (YFP). This method measures FRET efficiency
that reflects relative levels of heterotrimeric (inactive) G-proteins in the front
and back of cells that are exposed to cAMP gradients. After photobleaching
YFP, the increase, or dequenching, of CFP emission is a direct measure of
FRET efficiency. If FRET occurs, CFP emission will be quenched by YFP before
it is photobleached, and the real CFP intensity can only be measured after
photobleaching YFP. The efficiency of energy transfer E can be determined
from the relative fluorescence intensity of the energy donor (CFP) in the
absence, postbleaching (Ipost), and the presence, prebleaching (Ipre), of the
energy acceptor (YFP). E ⫽ 1⫺ (Ipre/Ipost). By photobleaching acceptor (YFP),
we can record Ipost after and Ipre before bleaching and calculate FRET efficiency. In the time series, the cells were first excited with the 454-nm laser at
⬃7.5% power to limit photobleaching. After recording fluorescence intensities
of the cells three times, the entire G cell was illuminated with 100% 514-nm
laser power 20 –30 times to photobleach YFP and then excited with the 454-nm
laser to record spectral images three more times. To determine the contribution of CFP and YFP in each pixel of the image and to obtain fluorescence
images of each fluorophore, the spectrally resolved images of each time-lapse
acquisition of Lambda Stack were processed using the Linear Unmixing
Function of LSM510 META. The intensities of each fluorophore in the regions
of interest in the time-lapse experiments were measured, normalized, and
expressed as a function of time using the software of LSM510 META.

Imaging and Data Processing
Images were processed and analyzed by the LSM 510 META software and
converted to TIFF files by the Adobe Photoshop software (San Jose, CA). All
frames of any given series were processed identically. Selected frames of the
series were assembled as montages using the Photoshop 7.0. Quantification of
fluorescence intensities of Alexa 594, GFP, CFP, and YFP in the regions of
interest was performed using the LSM 510 META software.

RESULTS
Simultaneously Visualizing cAMP Stimulation and
PHCrac-GFP Translocation
An increase in Dictyostelium cAMP receptor occupancy activates a signal transduction pathway leading to a transient
678

membrane translocation of PHCrac-GFP (Lilly and Devreotes, 1994; Parent et al., 1998). PIP3 serves as the binding
site for PHCrac-GFP, with the levels of inner membrane
leaflet PIP3 regulated by local opposing activities of PI3K
and PTEN (Huang et al., 2003). The cAMP-triggered PHCracGFP translocation is fast and transient, peaking within a few
seconds and returning to prestimulus levels in 30 s (Parent et
al., 1998). However, cAMP concentrations across the cell and
PHCrac-GFP translocation had never been simultaneously
imaged, and therefore the relationship between the amount
of cAMP that reaches various regions of the cell surface and
the temporal responses of PHCrac-GFP in these regions was
not known. We simultaneously measured both cAMP concentration and PHCrac-GFP membrane translocation in single living cells, using a confocal fluorescence microscope in
fast time-lapse experiments (Figure 1).
Cells expressing PHCrac-GFP, designated as PH cells, were
first allowed to differentiate to the chemotactic-competent
stage, and were then treated with latrunculin to eliminate
morphological cell polarization and migration. To directly
visualize and measure the spatial and temporal distribution
of the applied chemoattractant, we mixed cAMP with Alexa
594, a hydrophilic fluorescence dye with similar diffusion
properties as cAMP and determined cAMP concentrations
based on the fluorescence intensity in medium surrounding
the cells. On the addition of cAMP to a cell chamber, the red
signal reached the cell surface from all directions in less than
1 s and the intensity was uniform in the field. Thus, addition
of cAMP resulted in an immediate and uniform exposure of
the cell to cAMP (10 nM; Figure 1, A–C). The cAMP induced
a transient translocation of PHCrac-GFP from the cytosol to
the membrane. The translocation of PHCrac-GFP started
upon exposure to extracellular cAMP, reached its maximum
in ⬃10 s, and declined to the basal level in less than 30 s
Molecular Biology of the Cell

Signal Transduction Events and Chemotactic Responses

(Figure 1A). A quantitative analysis demonstrated that the
kinetics of intensity changes in the membrane-associated
and cytosolic PHCrac-GFP pools were inversely related (Figure 1E), indicating that there is a transient and quantitative
translocation of PHCrac-GFP from the cytosol to the membrane. PHCrac-GFP returned to the cytosol while the cell was
still exposed to cAMP and the receptors were still occupied
(Figure 1, A and C). The time from the addition of the
stimulus to the peak of the response was designated as Tmax,
and the maximal level of a transient response was measured
as maximum difference Rmax between the levels of cytosolic
PHCrac-GFP before and after application of the stimulus
(Figure 1E and Supplementary Figure S1).
Covisualizing cAMP-triggered Activation of G-proteins
and PHCrac-GFP Translocation in Single Living Cells
Dissociation of heterotrimeric G-proteins triggered by the
binding of cAMP to a cAR1 receptor is the first excitation
event leading to PHCrac-GFP translocation (Jin et al., 1998;
Parent et al., 1998). G-protein dissociation can be monitored
using FRET changes between G␣2CFP and YFPG␤ (Janetopoulos et al., 2001). To relate the spatio-temporal changes in
cAMP exposure to the resulting G-protein dissociation, and
to PIP3 accumulation (as reflected by PHCrac-GFP relocalization), it would be ideal to measure these events in a single
cell. However, because of the technical difficulty in accurately and simultaneously measuring intensity changes of
CFP, YFP, and Alexa 594, we first determined the dynamics
of PHCrac-GFP translocation to the membrane while also
analyzing the field of applied cAMP (Figure 1). We then
measured both G-protein dissociation by FRET and PHCracGFP translocation, using the dynamics of PHCrac-GFP as an
indicator of the cAMP stimulation (Figure 2). Because the
FRET signal between Ga2CFP and YFPG␤␥ is weak and the
GFP spectrum overlaps the spectra of CFP and YFP, it was
necessary to image the two signaling steps in separate cells
in order to obtain precise FRET measurements. FRET
changes between G␣2CFP and YFPG␤␥ were revealed in one
latrunculin-treated cell (G cell), and the membrane translocation of a GFP-tagged PH domain fusion protein was monitored in a nearby latrunculin-treated cell (PH cell), which
was within 10 ␮m of the G cell and thus exposed to the same
cAMP stimulus (Figure 2, B and C). In these cells, both the
cAMP receptors and the G-protein subunits are uniformly
distributed on the cell membrane (Figure 2B; Xiao et al., 1997;
Jin et al., 2000). We excited the cells with a 454-nm laser line
and acquired spectral images in 8 channels from 464 to 534
nm with approximately a 1-s interval between each successive image. Each pixel of the image contains data corresponding to an emission spectrum resulting from both CFP
and YFP fluorescence in the G cell, and from GFP in the PH
cell. Spectrally resolved time-lapse images of a G cell and a
neighboring PH cell were acquired upon stimulation by a
uniform field of cAMP added at time 0. Under these conditions, PHCrac-GFP transiently translocated from the cytosol
to the plasma membrane (Figure 2, B and E). G-protein
dissociation was assessed as a loss of FRET, detected as a
(donor) CFP intensity increase and a simultaneous (acceptor) YFP intensity decrease (Figure 2, B, F, and G). The
digitally separated CFP and YFP channels of the G cell
showed a clear increase in the CFP signal and a corresponding decrease in the YFP signal around the entire cell membrane with time after exposure to cAMP (Figure 2B). The
emission spectra across the entire membrane demonstrated
a cAMP-triggered FRET loss (Figure 2D), which was similar
in magnitude to the spectral changes measured previously
in a population of cells using a spectral fluorometer (JaneVol. 16, February 2005

Figure 2. Single-cell FRET measurement of heterotrimeric G-protein
dissociation in a uniform cAMP field. (A) Diagram shows how G-protein
dissociation induced by cAMP binding to the receptor can be monitored
by the loss of FRET between CFP and YFP tagged to the G␣ and G␤
subunits, respectively. It also shows the membrane translocation of PHCrac-GFP to monitor cAMP stimulation. (B) cAMP, 1 ␮M, was uniformly
applied at time 0. Fluorescence images of cAMP-triggered G-protein dissociation in the G cell and PHCrac-GFP translocation in the PH cell. Increased CFP and decreased YFP signal intensities around the G cell membrane at 10.2 and 20.4 s indicate G-protein subunit dissociation that
simultaneously reduces quenching of CFP and excitation of YFP. Transient PHCrac-GFP translocation to all regions of the plasma membrane was
clearly observed at 10.2 s in a nearby PH cell. Supplementary Videos
video2.avi and video3.avi show the full time course of CFP and YFP
intensity changes in a single living cell after cAMP stimulation, respectively. Images were captured at 1.1-s intervals and are replayed at five
frames/s. (C) Regions of interest used for quantitative analysis of Gprotein activation and membrane translocation of PHCrac-GFP in a uniform field of cAMP. (D) Combined emission spectra of the membrane
region of the G cell before and after the addition of cAMP at time 0. On
uniform stimulation with cAMP, a significant increase in the CFP emission
signal near 475 nm and a reciprocal decrease in the YFP emission near 528
nm were observed, consistent with a loss of FRET upon subunit dissociation. (E) Temporal changes in membrane associated PHCrac-GFP after
exposure of the cell to the same uniform field of cAMP. (F) Temporal
changes in the G-protein dissociation at the cell membrane after stimulation, reflected as a CFP (M-CFP, black) signal intensity increase and a
paralleled YFP (M-YFP, gray) signal decrease. (F) Uniformly applied
cAMP stimulation triggered G-protein dissociation, reflected as CFP signal intensity increase and YFP signal decrease. Means and SEs for each
time points are shown as temporal changes in the G-protein dissociation at
the membrane after stimulation by 2 ␮M cAMP (n ⫽ 6).
679

X. Xu et al.

Figure 3. Concentration-dependent changes in the rate of PHCracGFP recruitment to the membrane and G-protein activation. (A) The
kinetics of intensity changes in cytosolic PHCrac-GFP pools in response to two doses of cAMP stimulation. Means and SDs for each
time point are shown as temporal changes in cytosolic PHCrac-GFP
in response to a high-dose (1 ␮M, gray line, n ⫽ 6) and a low-dose
(10 nM, black line, n ⫽ 8) cAMP stimulation. (B) Dose-dependent
G-protein activation. Means ⫾ SE are shown as temporal changes in
the G-protein dissociation at the cell membrane after stimulation by
1 nM (f, n ⫽ 6), 100 nM (Œ, n ⫽ 3), and 10 ␮M (F, n ⫽ 5). (C) and
(D) One PH and one G cell were first stimulated with 1 nM cAMP
and then exposed to 100 nM cAMP. Before the second stimulation,
the cells were washed with buffer to remove previously added
cAMP and were allowed to recover for 10 min. (C) The graph shows
CFP intensity changes on the membrane after stimulation with a
low dose (1 nM, gray) or a high dose (100 nM, black) of cAMP. (D)
PHCrac-GFP association with the entire cell surface membrane in
response to a low dose (1 nM, gray) and a high dose (100 nM, black).
Similar results were obtained in more than 10 experiments (another
example is shown in Supplementary Figure S1, B and C).

topoulos et al., 2001). G-protein dissociation started upon
exposure of the cell to cAMP and reached a plateau (Figure
2, F and G), and the response of PHCrac-GFP membrane
translocation was transient (Figure 2E), whereas G␣ and
G␤␥ remained dissociated, indicating that an inhibitory process affecting the binding sites of PHCrac-GFP is regulated by
a mechanism other than G-protein reassociation.
Relationship between cAMP Concentration and the Time
to Maximum PHCrac-GFP Translocation and G-protein
Activation
To relate how different degrees of cAMP receptor activation
affect the duration and the magnitude of the transient PIP3
levels on the cell membrane, we determined the kinetics of
PHCrac-GFP translocation responses of cells stimulated with
a high (1 ␮M) and a low (10 nM) cAMP concentrations
(Figure 3A). The time required for reaching the maximal
response, Tmax, and the maximal level of a response, Rmax,
were further determined in multiple experiments with multiple cells exposed to three final concentrations of cAMP: 1,
10, and 100 nM that is close to the Kd for cAMP binding to
the receptor (Johnson et al., 1992). Means of Tmax for stimulation of 1 nM (n ⫽ 24), 10 nM (n ⫽ 28) and 100 nM (n ⫽ 29)
are 11.2; 10.13, 7.04 s, respectively; and means of Rmax are
0.68, 0.64, 0.66, respectively (Supplementary Table 1). These
results demonstrated that a higher degree of receptor acti680

vation resulted in a transient response that reaches its maximal level faster. The smaller Tmax for the higher concentration is consistent with the faster adaptation observed in
Figure 3A, i.e., a faster return of PHCrac-GFP to cytosol after
membrane translocation. Interestingly, different doses of
uniformly applied cAMP triggered similar levels of maximal
PIP3 production on the membrane.
We then measured G-protein activation in response to
different chemoattractant concentrations in entire membranes of individual cells by monitoring cAMP-triggered
FRET losses between the G␣2CFP and YFPG␤. Stimulation
with increasing concentrations of cAMP (1 nM, 100 nM, and
10 ␮M) led to increased FRET loss, indicating that a higher
degree of receptor activation resulted in a higher level of
G-protein activation in single living cells (Figure 3B). To
further confirm our results, we measured G-protein activation in one G cell and PHCrac-GFP translocation in one PH
cell in response to two concentrations of uniformly applied
cAMP. The cells were first stimulated with a low dose (1
nM), washed with buffer to remove cAMP, settled for at least
6 min to allow for complete recovery, and then exposed to a
higher concentration of cAMP (100 nM; Figure 3, C and D).
cAMP, 1 nM, triggered very little detectable G-protein dissociation, whereas stimulation with 100 nM cAMP robustly
activated G-proteins (Figure 3C). Both cAMP concentrations
triggered PHCrac-GFP translocation responses, and the
higher dose stimulated a slightly greater peak and a considerably faster rise in PHCrac-GFP recruitment to the membrane (Figure 3D). These results showed that receptor occupancy regulates the level of G-protein activation and a
higher activation of G-proteins leads to a smaller Tmax of
PHCrac-GFP translocation, suggesting that a larger increase
in receptor occupancy results not only in a higher level of an
excitation process but also a more rapid and robust elevation
of an inhibitory process, causing the transient response to
reach its maximal level faster (see Discussion for more detailed interpretation).
A Wave of cAMP Stimulation Induces a Transient and
Asymmetrical PHCrac-GFP Membrane Translocation and a
Local and Dose-dependent Activation of G-proteins
Cells usually encounter asymmetrical stimulation. What is
the initial response when a naı̈ve, unpolarized cell is exposed to a sudden asymmetrical stimulation? We first determined the kinetics of PHCrac-GFP membrane translocation in different regions of the cell while simultaneously
monitoring the applied stimulus. A micropipette filled with
a mixture of cAMP and dye (Alexa 594) was placed next to
PH cells. By applying pressure to a microinjector linked to
the micropipette, a small volume of the mixture of cAMP
and the dye was released at time 0, and a wave of chemoattractant swept across the chamber. A cAMP wave induced
transient and asymmetrical translocations of PHCrac-GFP in
PH cells (Figure 4 and Supplementary Video video8.avi).
PHCrac-GFP membrane translocations were analyzed in the
selected membrane regions PH-F, PH-M, and PH-B as the
front, middle, and back, respectively, of a single cell (Figure
4B), and the extent of cAMP exposure to these regions was
determined as the intensity changes of the dye in the same
front, middle, and back regions (DF, DM, and DB; Figure 4,
B and C). Quantitative analyses showed the peak value of
DF was about twice that of DB (Figure 4C), indicating that
the maximal cAMP concentration at the front region of the
cell was nearly twice that found at the back region. PHCracGFP translocated to the front, the middle, and the back
regions of the membrane, and the maximal level of PHCracGFP membrane association in each region of the cell memMolecular Biology of the Cell

Signal Transduction Events and Chemotactic Responses
Figure 4. PHCrac-GFP translocation in response
to acute exposure to a cAMP gradient. (A) A pulse
of cAMP was released by applying a pressure
increase from a nearby micropipette and sequential fluorescence images were captured to monitor
PHCrac-GFP distribution and cAMP concentration
represented as Alexa 594 intensity. Numbers in
the top left corner are seconds after cAMP release
of the selected frames. Supplementary Video
video5.avi presents the complete sequence from
this experiment. Frames were captured at 785-ms
intervals and are replayed at five frames/s. (B)
DF, DM, and DB represent the selected front,
middle, and back regions surrounding the cell
used for quantitative measurement of dynamic
changes of cAMP concentration. PH-F, PH-M,
and PH-B show the membrane regions for measuring PHCrac-GFP translocation responses to this
asymmetrical cAMP stimulation. (C) Time course
of changing cAMP concentration and of membrane translocation of PHCrac-GFP in the different
regions of a cell. (D) Quantitative analyses of the
relationship between the peak value of cAMP
stimulation and the peak value of the PHCrac-GFP
membrane association in each region of the cell
membrane. Relative strength of cAMP stimulation (䡺) was normalized by dividing the peak
value of DF, the maximal stimulation. Relative
response of PHCrac-GFP translocation was normalized by dividing the peak value of PH-F, the maximal local response. Data were obtained from 16
independent experiments. Means ⫾ SE are shown.

brane (the peak value of PH-F, PH-M, and PH-B in Figure
4C). We further quantified the relationship between the peak
value of cAMP stimulation and the peak value of the PHCracGFP membrane association in different regions of the cell
membrane (Figure 4D). The results demonstrated that a
directional stimulation of a cAMP wave triggered a crescentshaped transient membrane pattern of PHCrac-GFP and the
crescent can be used as a directional indicator for the oncoming cAMP wave.
Using the same experimental design, we measured the
spatial and temporal activation of G-proteins in a G cell
stimulated with a transient directional stimulus of cAMP
by FRET changes and related the activation of G-proteins
to the recruitment of PHCrac-GFP in a nearby PH cell
(Figure 5). Transient membrane accumulation of PHCracGFP in the PH cell was used to monitor the cAMP stimulation (Figure 5A). The dissociation of G-proteins in
regions of the front and back of the G cell was quantified
(Figure 5, A and B), and the responses of PHCrac-GFP
membrane translocation were also simultaneously measured in the front and back regions of the neighboring PH
cell (Figure 5, A and C). The front and back regions of the
cells that were analyzed were selected to show similar
mean intensities at time 0: CFP for G cells and GFP for PH
cells. The cAMP-triggered responses were normalized as
the ratio of the mean intensity at any given time (It) to that
of time 0 (I0), It/I0CFP for G-protein dissociation (Figure
5B) and It/I0GFP for PHCrac-GFP translocation (Figure
5C). The kinetics of the PHCrac-GFP translocation responses in the front and back regions of the PH cell
indicated that the cells were exposed to a transient and
asymmetrical cAMP stimulation. This stimulation resulted in G-protein activation in both the front and back
regions of the G cell (Figure 5, B and D). The extent of
G-protein dissociation was higher in the front than in the
back region (Figure 5, B and D), as expected from the
asymmetric cAMP concentration at the two poles of the
Vol. 16, February 2005

cell. These data provide direct evidence that G-proteins
are activated to different extents within distinct domains
of a cell’s perimeter in response to a transient and directional stimulus, validating the local G-protein excitation
hypothesis that is an essential component of current gradient sensing models (Parent and Devreotes, 1999; Iijima
et al., 2002).
The Sensing Machinery Spatially Amplifies a Stable
cAMP Gradient into Localized PHCrac-GFP Membrane
Association
Previous studies have demonstrated that when unpolarized
cells are exposed to a stable gradient for several minutes, the
differences in receptor occupancy across the cell surface lead
to persistently higher PHCrac-GFP membrane association at
the side facing the source of cAMP (Parent et al., 1998; Jin et
al., 2000). To quantitatively relate the local strength of cAMP
to the levels of membrane-associated PHCrac-GFP in the
front and back regions of a stably polarized cell, we placed
the latrunculin-treated PH cells into a gradient for several
minutes and then measured both the extracellular cAMP
gradient and the intracellular distribution of PHCrac-GFP
(Figure 6, A and B). Our analyses showed that when previously unpolarized cells were exposed to a cAMP gradient
(steepness: 23 ⫾ 1.4% difference across the cell diameter, n ⫽
6, in Figure 6C), the front membrane region accumulated
more than twice of the amount of PHCrac-GFP as did the
back (ratio between front and back is 2.5 ⫾ 0.27, n ⫽ 6,
difference between the front and back is around 150 ⫾ 27%
shown in Figure 5C). The data indicate that there is a substantial spatial amplification from the difference in cAMP
concentration to PHCrac-GFP membrane localization in a
latrunculin-treated cell positioned in a chemoattractant gradient (with a steepness of ⬃23%).
We next measured the steady-state level of inactive
(heterotrimeric) G-proteins in latrunculin-treated G cells
residing in stable cAMP gradients with similar steepness
681

X. Xu et al.

Figure 5. G-protein dissociation in the front
and back regions of cells in response to an
acute exposure to a cAMP gradient. (A) Gprotein dissociation in a single living cell
upon an acute stimulation by a directional
source of cAMP. Only CFP images of the G
cell are shown. (B) G-protein dissociation
over time in the front and back regions of the
G cell, expressed as a ratio of the CFP signal at
each time point to the CFP signal at time 0. (C)
Temporal changes in PHCrac-GFP translocation to the front side of the cell. Similar results
were obtained in eight experiments. (D). Kinetics of G-protein dissociation in the front
and back regions of cells upon stimulation of
a cAMP wave. Cells were stimulated by a
cAMP wave at 0 s. Time course of G-protein
dissociation, expressed as a ratio of the CFP
signal at each time point to the CFP signal at
0 s, are shown as means ⫾ SE (n ⫽ 22) at each
time point.

(⬃20%) but different cAMP concentrations (Figure 6, D
and E). The G cells were mixed with PH cells, which were
used as indicators of the gradient (Figure 6 D). We previously measured cAMP-induced G-protein dissociation
by monitoring the FRET donor (CFP) intensity increase
and the acceptor (YFP) intensity decrease in response to
stimulation. To compare the difference in the steady-state
levels of G-protein activation in the front and back regions
of a G cell, we applied acceptor photobleaching (or donor
dequenching) method to measure the level of stable, associated G␣2CFP and YFPG␤␥, the inactive form of the
G-proteins by measuring the intensity increase of the
donor (CFP) after photobleaching the acceptor (YFP).
FRET efficiency is defined as 1 ⫺ (Ipre/Ipost), where Ipost is
the intensity of the donor (CFP) after photobleaching and
Ipre is the intensity of the donor (CFP) before photobleaching (Lippincott-Schwartz et al., 2001; Gu et al., 2004). FRET
efficiency reflects the amount of inactive G-proteins in the
selected front (䡺) and back (f) regions of G cells (Figure
6E). After photobleaching YFP in the entire G cell, CFP
emission increases were detected in both the front and
back regions of the G cell (Figure 6D). Our quantitative
analysis showed that the average FRET efficiency was
lower in the front surface region than in the back region in
cells residing in stable gradients of both cAMP concentrations; and the proportion of inactive G-protein decrease in
both the front and back of cells in a gradient with similar
steepness by a higher concentration of cAMP (Figure 6E).
Because G-protein subunits are uniformly distributed on
the membrane of latrunculin-treated cells exposed to a
cAMP gradient, the amount of active G-protein is inversely related to the amount of inactive G-protein in a
region. Our results indicated that there is a difference in
the steady state of active G-proteins between the front and
back of cells exposed to gradients.
682

Dynamic Process of Signal Amplification in a Cell
Exposed to a Stable cAMP Gradient
To investigate the dynamics of the amplification of differences in receptor occupancy between the front and back of
the cell, we abruptly exposed naı̈ve cells to a stable cAMP
gradient and measured the dynamics of PHCrac-GFP translocation and G-protein activation in the front and back regions of the cell membrane. To do so, a micropipette filled
with a mixture of cAMP (1 ␮M) and dye was first placed
roughly 1 mm away from latrunculin-treated cells and then
quickly moved to within 10 ␮m of the cells to rapidly
establish a steady gradient. We measured the fluorescence
intensity of the dye in the front and back regions of the cell
and found that a stable gradient was quickly established
around the cell (Figure 7, B and C). After the cell was
exposed to the gradient, membrane translocations of PHCracGFP occurred initially in both the front and the back regions
of the cell surface, reached maximal levels within 11 s and
then declined by 40 s (Figure 7, A and D). The peak intensity
in the front region was higher than in the back region of the
cell and correlated with the magnitude of the difference in
the cAMP concentration at the two poles of the cell (Figure
7, A and D). Surprisingly, continued exposure of the cell to
the gradient for about a minute led to a second increase in
the amount of membrane-associated PHCrac-GFP at the front
of the cell that exceeded the initial response at this location.
In contrast, membrane-associated PHCrac-GFP at the back of
the cell showed no second increase and remained at a low
steady state level (Figure 7, A and D); The slight decrease of
GFP intensity over time is caused by photobleaching). The
experiments, which were repeated nine times (Supplementary Figure S3 and Supplementary Video video6.avi show
two other examples), revealed that previously not documented two-step process is involved in establishing the
highly asymmetric steady-state distribution of PHCrac-GFP
Molecular Biology of the Cell

Signal Transduction Events and Chemotactic Responses

Figure 6. Asymmetrical subcellular distributions of PHCrac-GFP and inactive G-protein
heterotrimers in a nonpolarized cell exposed
to a steady cAMP gradient. (A) PHCrac-GFP
distribution in a cell exposed to a steady
cAMP gradient visualized as the red Alexa
594 fluorescence signals. (B) Quantitative
measurement of the cAMP gradient and intracellular distribution of PHCrac-GFP along
the line starting from the position of the dispensing micropipette and through the central
part of the cell in A. The gray line reflects the
relative concentration of cAMP. Assuming
the maximal intensity equals 1 ␮M cAMP, we
estimated that the concentration is ⬃320 nM
at the front side and 240 nM at the back side
of the cell. The black line plots the PHCrac-GFP
distribution from the front to the back side of
the cell. These results are typical of six experiments. (C) Membrane-associated PHCrac-GFP
at the front and back regions of nonpolarized
cells in response to the difference in cAMP
concentration (cAMP). cAMP concentration
(cAMP) and membrane associated PHCracGFP in the front and back regions of nonpolarized cells were directly measured from six
independent experiments. (D) G and PH cell images in a steady gradient. The selected front and back regions for FRET measurement of the
distribution of inactive heterotrimeric G-proteins are shown. The entire area of the G cell was illuminated to photobleach YFP, and FRET was
monitored as increased CFP emission in the selected front and back regions after photobleaching. FRET efficiency was calculated as
[IntensityCFP(post) ⫺ IntensityCFP(pre)]/IntensityCFP(post). (E) FRET efficiency that reflects the proportion of inactive G-proteins in the front and
back regions of cells in steady gradients with similar steepness (⬃20%) but different cAMP concentrations. Means and SEs of FRET efficiency
show the proportion of inactive G-proteins in the back (f) is higher than that in the front (䡺) in response to both low (1 ␮M cAMP in the
micropipette, n ⫽ 16 and p ⬍ 0.002) and high (3 ␮M in the micropipette, n ⫽ 21 and p ⬍ 0.002) cAMP concentration.

in a cell exposed to a gradient. Interestingly, a gradient with
a similar steepness but a lower cAMP concentration triggered a dynamic process of PHCrac-GFP response with different temporal-spatial characteristics (Figure 8). Membrane
translocations of PHCrac-GFP occurred in the front but
barely in the back. Therefore, the maximal levels of PHCracGFP membrane association of the initial response in the
front and back displayed a bigger difference. In addition, the
membrane associated PHCrac-GFP at the front hardly declined after the initial response and the second increase
started earlier (Figure 8A) compared with that generated
under a higher concentration of cAMP (Figure 8B).
Using the same experimental design, we measured Gprotein activation in a G cell and simultaneously monitored
PHCrac-GFP response in the front region of a nearby PH cell
as an indicator of the cAMP gradient (Figure 9). A micropipette filled with cAMP was quickly moved to the upper
middle of the two cells at time 0 s. The amount of membrane-associated PHCrac-GFP in the front region of the PH
cell increased, reached a peak in 20 s, declined, started a
second phase of increase at 45 s, and reached another high
steady state at about 80 s, as observed in the previous
experiment. In response to the same stimulation, G-protein
activation occurred in both the front and back regions of the
G cell and the activation was slightly higher in the front than
in the back of the cell after a 20-s exposure to the gradient
(Figure 9, A and C). Dissociated G-proteins remained at
steady levels in both the front and back of the G cell (Figure
9C) during the second increase of PHCrac-GFP, in which
additional binding sites for PHCrac-GFP were only generated
in the front of the PH cell experiencing the highest concentration of cAMP (Figure 9B). Similar results were obtained
from five independent experiments (Supplementary Figure
S4 shows another example). We measured G-protein activation in cells that were suddenly exposed to cAMP gradients
Vol. 16, February 2005

with different steepness but similar cAMP concentrations in
the front of the cells (Figure 9, D and E). In responses to
similar cAMP concentrations, G-proteins in the front regions
were activated to similar levels (Figure 9, D and E). However, in the back regions, G-protein activation was clearly
lower, after reaching steady states, in the steeper gradient
(with a steepness of ⬃100%) because of a much lower local
cAMP concentration (Figure 9D). Therefore, in a steeper
gradient, the difference in G-protein activation between the
front and back of cells was bigger (estimated ⬃130%; Figure
9D) than that difference (estimated ⬃19%) measured by
shallower gradients (with a steepness of ⬃20%; Figure 9E).
These results suggested that extent of G-protein activation in
difference regions of a cells surface was determined by the
local concentration of cAMP.
DISCUSSION
The central question driving chemotaxis research is how an
external chemoattractant gradient is translated into a steep
intracellular gradient of certain signaling components, leading to morphological cell polarization and directional cell
movement. Determining the detailed spatiotemporal patterns of intracellular localization and activation of the components of the chemotactic signaling pathway is essential for
answering this question. Here, we have reported advances
in live-cell fluorescence microscopy that allowed us to measure the applied chemoattractant concentration, the degree
of G-protein activation by FRET imaging, and changes in the
level and distribution of PIP3 in single living cells with the
needed high temporal and spatial resolution. Our study is
consistent with the expectation that the extent of G-protein
activation in different regions of the cell surface reflects the
local extracellular cAMP concentration. We found that a
higher level of uniformly applied cAMP stimulation triggers
683

X. Xu et al.

Figure 7. Dynamics of PHCrac-GFP
translocation in a cell suddenly exposed to a static cAMP gradient. (A) A
PH cell (green) is exposed to a sudden
gradient (red). Membrane translocation of PHCrac-GFP shows a peak, then
a decline, and a second peak. Green
fluorescence intensity along the white
line across the cell is shown under
each image, indicating the distribution
of PHCrac-GFP in the cell. Images were
captured at 0.96-s intervals, and the
frames at selected time points are
shown here. (B) Front (DF) and back
(DB) regions used to evaluate quantitative changes of Alexa 594 fluorescence intensity as a measure of cAMP
concentration. PH-F and PH-B were
selected membrane regions used for
monitoring the response of PHCracGFP translocation to the front and
back of the cell relative to the cAMP
gradient, respectively. (C) Rapid generation of a stable cAMP gradient. (D)
Dynamic changes in PHCrac-GFP
membrane translocation at the front (PH-F) and the back (PH-B) sides of the cell. The slight decrease of GFP intensity over time is caused
by photobleaching. Data are representative of nine experiments. Supplementary Video video6.avi shows a full set of images from one of nine
experiments.

not only a stronger G-protein activation but also a faster
adaptation. Using a new method that allowed us to abruptly
expose naı̈ve cells (which have not experienced chemoattractant) to stable cAMP gradients in a controlled manner,
we found that G-proteins were persistently activated at the
entire cell surface under this condition, whereas PIP3 accumulation in the front of the cell displayed an unexpected
biphasic temporal pattern. Details of the behavior of PIP3
suggest modifications of current gradient sensing models
(Postma and Van Haastert, 2001; Iglesias and Levchenko,
2002; Iijima et al., 2002; Rappel et al., 2002; Devreotes and
Janetopoulos, 2003), and we propose a modified model involving signal-dependent locally recruited inhibitors of
PI3K activity to account for the observed dynamics of PIP3.
G-protein Activation on the Cell Surface Depends on the
Strength of Local Extracellular Stimuli
Previous studies have shown that both cAMP receptors and
G-protein ␤ subunits are uniformly distributed along the
perimeter of unpolarized cells (Xiao et al., 1997; Servant et al.,
1999; Jin et al., 2000) and that receptor occupancy reflects the
local external concentration of chemoattractant (Ueda et al.,
2001). cAMP-dose– dependent G-protein activation had previously only been measured as FRET changes in a population of cells (Janetopoulos et al., 2001). Based on the kinetics
of FRET change, it was proposed that G-protein activation
reflects the local extracellular cAMP concentration (Iijima et
al., 2002; Devreotes and Janetopoulos, 2003). This assumption has been a major component in models of chemotactic
gradient sensing, but direct measurement of G-protein activation had not been carried out at the single cell level. In this
study, temporal and spatial activation of G-proteins in single
living cells exposed to various chemoattractant fields was
directly visualized and measured for the first time. We
found that the level of G-protein activation on membrane of
the uniformly stimulated cells depends on cAMP concentrations (Figure 3). In response to asymmetrical cAMP stimulations, a higher degree of G-protein activation occurs in the
front of a cell where the local receptor occupancy is higher
684

than that in the back (Figures 5, 6, and 9). We measured
G-protein activities of single cells that were exposed to gradients with similar steepness but two different cAMP concentrations (Figure 6) and gradients with similar concentration but two different steepness (Figure 9). When cells were
exposed to a gradient (with a steepness of ⬃20%), the degree
of G-protein dissociation was ⬃19% higher in the front than
in the back side of the cells (Figure 9E), and the relative
difference in PHCrac-GFP distribution between the front and
back was ⬃150% (Figure 6), which is independent of cAMP
concentration (Xu and Jin, unpublished data and Janetopoulos et al., 2004), indicating that cells are able to spatially
amplify the difference in G-protein activation into the
PHCrac-GFP membrane localization. Furthermore, by determining spatial-temporal dynamics of G-protein activation
and PHCrac-GFP membrane translocation in cells that were
suddenly exposed to gradients, our study revealed that the
process that is responsible for the spatial signal amplifica-

Figure 8. Kinetics of PHCrac-GFP membrane translocation in the
front and back of cells when they were suddenly exposed to stable
cAMP gradients with similar steepness but different cAMP concentrations. (A) and (B) Naive cells were suddenly exposed to a stable
gradient of a low and a high concentration of cAMP, respectively.
Micropipettes filled with 100 nM or 1 ␮M of cAMP were moved
from far to near the cells at 0 s. Dynamics changes in membrane
associated PHCrac-GFP in the front and back regions of cells are
shown as means ⫾ SE (n ⫽ 26 and 23 for A and B, respectively).
Molecular Biology of the Cell

Signal Transduction Events and Chemotactic Responses

Figure 9. G-protein activation after a sudden
exposure to a steady cAMP gradient. (A) Comparison of G-protein activation (CFP images)
and PHCrac-GFP translocation. Frames were
captured at 1.06-s intervals and selected frames
were shown. Regions of interest for the data
reported in B and C are also shown. (B) Dynamics of the PHCrac-GFP membrane association in
the front of the PH cell. (C) G-protein activation
in the front (black) and back (gray) of the G cell,
measured as the increase of CFP intensity. Similar results were obtained five times. (D) and (E)
Kinetics of G-protein dissociation in the front
and back of cells in response to cAMP gradients
with different steepness but similar cAMP concentration in the front of the cells. Micropipette
filled with 1 or 3 ␮M of cAMP was moved from
1500 ␮m away to ⬃10 ␮m (D) or 50 ␮m (E) from
the cells at 0 s. These movement generated gradients with similar cAMP concentration in the
front of the cells but different steepness of
⬃100% (D) or 20% (E), respectively, which were
estimated from the measurement of a stable
gradient shown in Supplementary Figure S2.
G-protein activation in the front (black) and
back (gray) of G cells, measured as the increase
of CFP intensity, are shown. Means ⫾ SE of
each time point (n ⫽ 10 and 18 for D and E,
respectively) are shown as temporal changes in
the G-protein dissociation in the front and back
after stimulation. To estimate the relative difference in G-protein activation, after reaching the
steady states, between the front and back side of
cells, we first calculated Means, 兺It/I0CFP/n,
where n is the number of the time points; the
first time point is 27s and the last time point is
100 s. (D) 118.4 ⫾ 1.3% (front) and 108 ⫾ 1.7%
(back); (E) 121.5 ⫾ 2.7% (front) and 118 ⫾ 1.4%
(back). Relative difference in D: (118.4% ⫺ 1)/
(108% ⫺ 1) ⫺ 1 ⫽ 130%; in E: (121.5% ⫺ 1)/
(118% ⫺ 1) ⫺ 1 ⫽ 19.3%.

tion occurs with a significant time lag after initial changes in
receptor occupancy and G-protein activation, suggesting
that activation of G-proteins provides a simple, intracellular
translation of the external gradient and the amplification of
the external gradient must hence be achieved further downstream in the signaling pathway. Our results are consistent
with the idea that the extent of G-protein activation in different regions of the cell surface reflects the local cAMP
receptor occupancy (Iijima et al., 2002; Devreotes and Janetopoulos, 2003).
A Higher Dose of Homogeneously Applied
Chemoattractant Leads to Faster Adaptation
Models of chemotactic gradient sensing need to account for
two aspects of cellular behavior: i) transient activation, followed by adaptation when cells are exposed to uniform
increases in chemoattractant concentration (as seen in the
transient nature of PHCrac-GFP translocation to the plasma
membrane) and ii) development of strong intracellular biochemical asymmetry in response to chemoattractant gradients. A “local excitation, global inhibition” model has been
proposed to explain these behaviors (Parent and Devreotes,
1999), according to which the extent of receptor activation
determines the strengths of two opposing processes: a local
excitatory one and a global inhibitory one. The balance of
these two processes is assumed to control the activities of
two enzymes with opposing chemical functions, PI3K (a
Vol. 16, February 2005

kinase) and PTEN (a phosphatase). Changes in this balance
lead to alterations in PIP3 levels on the inner cell membrane.
Local excitation, reflecting local levels of receptor occupancy, increases the recruitment and activation of PI3K and
decreases membrane-bound PTEN, whereas the proposed
global inhibition, determined by the cell’s average receptor
occupancy, deactivates PI3K and promotes reassociation of
PTEN with the membrane (Devreotes and Janetopoulos,
2003, Janetopoulos et al., 2004).
Although there seems to be general agreement that the
primary intracellular stimulus is provided through G-protein activation and that excitation involves activation of
PI3K, the biochemical components responsible for the inhibitory process are currently unknown. Consequently, we can
only indirectly draw inferences about the nature of those
components by measuring the effects of their activities. To
investigate the relationship between stimulus strength and
the speed at which inhibition induces adaptation, we exposed cells to different doses of homogeneously applied
cAMP. We reasoned that if excitation rises quickly and
plateaus, and the effects of inhibition increase more slowly
after receptor activation, then initially PIP3 levels would
increase until at some point (Tmax) the activities of PI3K and
PTEN would be equally strong and the net change in the
level of PIP3 would be zero. Further increase of the inhibitory components would then cause PIP3 to decrease. A
smaller Tmax after a stronger uniform stimulus would there685

X. Xu et al.

fore occur if the stronger stimulus not only led to a higher
excitation but also to a faster induction of strong inhibitory
processes. We found that exposing cells to a higher concentration of cAMP increased the level of G-protein activation
and indeed shortened Tmax. This finding, together with the
fact that the amplitude of the PIP3 response showed only a
weak dependence on the strength of the applied stimulus,
reveals the cells’ ability to robustly respond and quickly
adapt to a wide range of stimulus strengths due to a finetuned interplay between excitation and inhibition.
A Gradient-induced Biphasic Response of PIP3 in the
Front Side of a Cell Suggests Asymmetrical Recruitment
of Inhibitors to the Membrane
Several attempts have been made to predict the spatiotemporal patterns of G-protein activation and PIP3 accumulation at the front and back sides of a cell that is abruptly
exposed to a stable cAMP gradient (Postma and Van Haastert, 2001; Iglesias and Levchenko, 2002; Iijima et al., 2002;
Rappel et al., 2002; Devreotes and Janetopoulos, 2003). Temporal changes in PIP3 levels are predicted to display a simple
peak in both the front and back of the cell according to these
recent models: After exposure to a gradient, PIP3 accumulation is assumed to first occur at both ends, to reach a
maximum, and then to decline to reach different steady-state
levels in distinct parts of the cell. A global, stimulus-dependent inhibition, is assumed to act equally everywhere on the
cell membrane suppressing the response in the back, but
much less in the front of the cell where the excitatory stimulus is stronger. In contrast to these predictions, we found
that PIP3 accumulation at the front of cells exposed to such
a sudden, stable gradient did not persistently remain at a
high level after the onset of stimulation. Instead, it decayed
after an initial peak and subsequently went through a
slower, longer-lasting second phase of increase, followed by
a second, attenuated decay. This secondary rise did not
occur at the back side of the cell. Recent studies have shown
that a uniform cAMP stimulation induces a temporal biphasic translocation response of PHCrac-GFP to the plasma
membrane in polarized and even in latrunculin-treated D.
discoideum cells (Postma et al., 2003, 2004a, 2004b). After a
rapid and transient translocation of PHCrac-GFP to nearly
the entire plasma membrane, multiple self-organizing
PHCrac-GFP patches form in various regions of the membrane in response to a uniform stimulation, suggesting that
cells can respond in various directions without an extracellular directional cue from a gradient. We found that a cAMP
gradient induced a persistent and graded G-protein activation on the inner membrane, which provides spatial cues to
generate a polarized PHCrac-GFP translocation through the
temporal biphasic pattern that specifically occurred in the
front side, indicating that the gradient sensing machinery is
able to determine the preferred direction of a polarized
response independent of cell polarity and the actin cytoskeleton in D. discoideum cells. We interpret a gradient-induced
PHCrac-GFP translocation response as a two-step process
consisting of an “activation and adaptation” step, during
which a cell transiently responds to a sudden increase in
receptor occupancy, followed by an “amplification” step,
during which PIP3 reaccumulates only at the front of the cell.
When a cell is exposed to a gradient, PI3K is enriched at
the membrane in the front whereas membrane-bound PTEN
accumulates in the back (Funamoto et al., 2002; Janetopoulos
et al., 2004). However, this simple redistribution of PTEN
and PI3K could not fully explain the details of the biphasic
response observed in our study. Several possible models are
discussed below.
686

In our view, the “activation and adaptation” step is similar to the response to uniform stimulation: G-proteins dissociate, PI3K is recruited and activated (Funamoto et al.,
2002; Huang et al., 2003), and PTEN dissociates from the
membrane (Funamoto et al., 2002; Iijima and Devreotes,
2002). As a result, PIP3 levels increase along the entire perimeter of the cell in proportion to the cAMP level at each
point along the membrane. PI3K activity is then downregulated because of inhibitor recruitment to the membrane,
a process that must be strong enough to result in a decrease
of PIP3 levels even though the amount of membrane-associated PTEN has not yet returned to its prestimulus level
(Funamoto et al., 2002). The gradual redistribution of PTEN
away from the front of the cell, which has recently been
observed in latrunculin-treated D. discoideum cells (Iijima et
al., 2004), is presumed to result in the second rise of PIP3 in
that region. In response to a gradient with lower absolute
concentration of cAMP, we observed a smaller decline after
the first peak (Figure 8). The biphasic response reported
here, which we suggest arises from differential rates of PI3K
inactivation and redistribution of PTEN at the front of the
cell, had been predicted by a computational model before
the experiment (Meier-Schellersheim, unpublished results).
Interestingly, the second increase of PIP3 levels in the front
of the cell reaches a peak and declines a little after some time
and PIP3 in the back of the cell does not decay indefinitely in
spite of the highly polarized distribution of PTEN. If we
assume that the loss of PTEN from the front is not accompanied by a loss of PI3K, then the PI3K-inhibiting activity we
postulate must be regulated by local, rather than global,
feedback mechanisms; this would result in a stronger suppression of PI3K activity (as opposed to concentration) in the
front and a much weaker suppression of its activity in the
back, accounting for the limitation of PIP3 accumulation in
the front and the stabilization of PIP3 levels in the back.
The putative inhibitor(s) remain(s) to be identified.
Among the candidates are Ras GTPase-activating proteins
(RasGAP). RasGAP binds PIP3 on the cell membrane following activation of PI3K (Lockyer et al., 1999). The recruitment
of this molecule would contribute to a negative feedback
loop by deactivating Ras, an activator of PI3K (Insall et al.,
1996; Tuxworth et al., 1997; Funamoto et al., 2002, Li et al.,
2003; Meili and Firtel 2003; Xu et al., 2003). Biochemical
identification of the proposed PI3K inhibitor, whether RasGAP or another molecule, would allow for new fluorescence
microscopy experiments that assess G-protein activation,
PIP3 dynamics, PTEN and PI3K distribution, and PI3K inhibitor location in a single cell to rigorously test our model.
Other models may also explain the biphasic response. For
example, if receptor activation would elicit a transient increase in PTEN activity (as opposed to membrane localization), this could result in a transient decrease in PIP3 level on
the whole cell membrane, and redistribution of PTEN to the
back side of the cell could result in a PIP3 reaccumulation
only at the front of the cell. When PIP3 levels in both the
front and back of a cell reach the steady-states and the cell
becomes biochemically polarized, the level of PTEN in the
front is low (Funamoto et al., 2002; Iijima and Devreotes,
2002), whereas the PI3K amount in the front remains very
high (Funamoto et al., 2002). It is possible that PIP3 level in
the front do not keep raising indefinitely because diffusion
of PIP3 is fast enough to bring it to PTEN that then degrades
it. Alternatively, a reduction in the level of PIP2, the substrate of PI3K, on the membrane may limit the rise of PIP3 in
the front. However, this seems unlikely because PIP2 is
unlikely a limiting factor because the level of PIP2 is several
Molecular Biology of the Cell

Signal Transduction Events and Chemotactic Responses

hundred fold higher than that of PIP3 in the plasma membrane (Huang et al., 2003).
Gradient Sensing, Cell Polarity, and Chemotaxis
Although we investigated gradient sensing in the absence of
preexisting cell polarity, chemotaxing cells are polarized,
and many signaling components are asymmetrically distributed in such cells. In neutrophils and D. discoideum, Rac and
CDC42 play different roles in the regulation of PIP3 in various regions of polarized cells (Butty et al., 2002; Li et al.,
2003; Meili and Firtel, 2003; Xu et al., 2003; Park et al., 2004).
It has been proposed that PIP3 and Rac serve as signals in a
positive feedback loop that enhances PIP3 production at the
leading edge of a polarized chemotaxing cell (Weiner et al.,
2002; Welch et al., 2002; Srinivasan et al., 2003). Another
mechanism leading to intracellular polarization in mammalian cells is the generation of divergent signals by different
receptor-activated heterotrimeric G-proteins in the leading
and trailing edges of a cell: in the front, GPCR-activated Gi
lead to production of PIP3, activate Rac, and induce polymerization of actin; in the back, the same receptor stimulates
G12 and G13, which mediate the inhibition of the responses
occurring at the leading edge (Xu et al., 2003). Both mechanisms require a polarized morphology before a cell is able to
amplify chemoattractant gradients. The actin-independent
biphasic response we observed allows a cell to localize biochemical responses before it becomes morphologically polarized. After morphological polarization occurs, other
mechanisms may further enhance a cell’s gradient sensing
ability during chemotaxis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Ronald N. Germain, Susan K. Pierce, Dale Hereld, Alan Kimmel,
and Corale Parent for discussions and critical readings of the manuscript.

REFERENCES
Adams, S. R., Harootunian, A. T., Buechler, Y. J., Taylor, S. S., and Tsien, R. Y.
(1991). Fluorescence ratio imaging of cyclic AMP in single cells. Nature 349,
694 – 697.
Butty, A. C., Perrinjaquet, N., Petit, A., Jaquenoud, M., Segall, J. E., Hofmann,
K., Zwahlen, C., and Peter, M. (2002). A positive feedback loop stabilizes the
guanine-nucleotide exchange factor Cdc24 at sites of polarization. EMBO J. 21,
1565–1576.
Chung, C. Y., Funamoto, S., and Firtel, R. A. (2001). Signaling pathways
controlling cell polarity and chemotaxis. Trends Biochem. Sci. 26, 557–566.
Comer, F. I., and Parent, C. A. (2002). PI 3-kinases and PTEN: how opposites
chemoattract. Cell 109, 541–544.
Devreotes, P., and Janetopoulos, C. (2003). Eukaryotic chemotaxis: distinctions between directional sensing and polarization. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 20445–
20448.
Devreotes, P. N., and Zigmond, S. H. (1988). Chemotaxis in eukaryotic cells:
a focus on leukocytes and Dictyostelium. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 4, 649 – 686.
Funamoto, S., Meili, R., Lee, S., Parry, L., and Firtel, R. A. (2002). Spatial and
temporal regulation of 3-phosphoinositides by PI 3-kinase and PTEN mediates chemotaxis. Cell 109, 611– 623.
Funamoto, S., Milan, K., Meili, R., and Firtel, R. A. (2001). Role of phosphatidylinositol 3⬘ kinase and a downstream pleckstrin homology domain-containing protein in controlling chemotaxis in Dictyostelium. J. Cell Biol. 153,
795– 810.
Gu, Y., Di, W. L., Kelsell, D. P., and Zicha, D. (2004). Quantitative fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET) measurement with acceptor photobleaching
and spectral unmixing. J. Microsc. 21, 162–173.
Hazeki, O., Okada, T., Kurosu, H., Takasuga, S., Suzuki, T., and Katada, T.
(1998). Activation of PI 3-kinase by G protein betagamma subunits. Life Sci.
62, 1555–1559.
Hirsch, E., Katanaev, V. L.,. Garlanda, C., Azzolino, O., Pirola, L., Silengo, L.,
Sozzani, S., Mantovani, A., Altruda, F., and Wymann, M. P. (2000). Central

Vol. 16, February 2005

role for G protein-coupled phosphoinositide 3-kinase gamma in inflammation. Science 287, 1049 –1053.
Huang, Y. E., Iijima, M., Parent, C. A., Funamoto, S., Firtel, R. A., and
Devreotes, P. (2003). Receptor-mediated regulation of PI3Ks confines
PI(3,4,5)P3 to the leading edge of chemotaxing cells. Mol. Biol. Cell 14,
1913–1922.
Iglesias, P. A., and Levchenko, A. (2002). Modeling the cell’s guidance system.
Sci. STKE 2002, RE12.
Iijima, M., and Devreotes, P. (2002). Tumor suppressor PTEN mediates sensing of chemoattractant gradients. Cell 109, 599 – 610.
Iijima, M., Huang, Y. E., and Devreotes, P. (2002). Temporal and spatial
regulation of chemotaxis. Dev. Cell 3, 469 – 478.
Iijima, M., Huang, Y. E., Luo, H.R., Vazquez, F., and Devreotes, P. N. (2004).
Novel mechanism of PTEN regulation by its phosphatidylinositol 4,5bisphosphate binding motif is critical for chemotaxis. J. Biol. Chem. 279,
16606 –16613.
Insall, R., Kuspa, A., Lilly, P. J., Shaulsky, G., Levin, L. R., Loomis, W. F., and
Devreotes, P. (1994). CRAC, a cytosolic protein containing a pleckstrin homology domain, is required for receptor and G. protein-mediated activation
of adenylyl cyclase in Dictyostelium. J. Cell Biol. 126, 1537–1545.
Insall, R. H., Borleis, J., and Devreotes, P. N. (1996). The aimless RasGEF is
required for processing of chemotactic signals through G-protein-coupled
receptors in Dictyostelium. Curr. Biol. 6, 719 –729.
Janetopoulos, C., Jin, T., and Devreotes, P. (2001). Receptor-mediated activation of heterotrimeric G-proteins in living cells. Science 291, 2408 –2411.
Janetopoulos, C., Ma, L., Devreotes, P. N., and Iglesias, P. A. (2004). Chemoattractant-induced phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate accumulation is
spatially amplified and adapts, independent of the actin cytoskeleton. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 8951– 8956.
Jin, T., Amzel, M., Devreotes, P. N., and Wu, L. (1998). Selection of gbeta
subunits with point mutations that fail to activate specific signaling pathways
in vivo: dissecting cellular responses mediated by a heterotrimeric G protein
in Dictyostelium discoideum. Mol. Biol. Cell 9, 2949 –2961.
Jin, T., Zhang, N., Long, Y., Parent, C. A., and Devreotes, P. N. (2000).
Localization of the G protein betagamma complex in living cells during
chemotaxis. Science 287, 1034 –1036.
Johnson, R. L., Van Haastert, P. J., Kimmel, A. R., Saxe, C. L., 3rd, Jastorff, B.,
and Devreotes, P. N. (1992). The cyclic nucleotide specificity of three cAMP
receptors in Dictyostelium. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 4600 – 4607.
Kavran, J. M., Klein, D. E., Lee, A., Falasca, M., Isakoff, S. J., Skolnik, E. Y., and
Lemmon, M. A. (1998). Specificity and promiscuity in phosphoinositide binding by pleckstrin homology domains. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 30497–30508.
Levchenko, A., and Iglesias, P. A. (2002). Models of eukaryotic gradient
sensing: application to chemotaxis of amoebae and neutrophils. Biophys. J. 82,
50 – 63.
Li, Z., Hannigan, M., Mo, Z., Liu, B., Lu, W., Wu, Y., Smrcka, A. V., Wu, G.,
Li, L., Liu, M., Huang, C. K., and Wu, D. (2003). Directional sensing requires
G beta gamma-mediated PAK1 and PIX alpha-dependent activation of Cdc42.
Cell 114, 215–227.
Li, Z., Jiang, H., Xie, W., Zhang, Z., Smrcka, A. V., and Wu, D. (2000). Roles
of PLC-beta2 and -beta3 and PI3Kgamma in chemoattractant-mediated signal
transduction. Science 287, 1046 –1049.
Liliental, J., Moon, S. Y., Lesche, R., Mamillapalli, R., Li, D., Zheng, Y., Sun, H.,
and Wu, H. (2000). Genetic deletion of the Pten tumor suppressor gene
promotes cell motility by activation of Rac1 and Cdc42 GTPases. Curr. Biol.
10, 401– 404.
Lilly, P. J., and Devreotes, P. N. (1994). Identification of CRAC, a cytosolic
regulator required for guanine nucleotide stimulation of adenylyl cyclase in
Dictyostelium. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 14123–14129.
Lippincott-Schwartz, J., Snapp, E., and Kenworthy, A. (2001). Studying protein dynamics in living cells. Nat. Rev. 2, 444 – 456.
Lockyer, P. J., Wennstrom, S., Kupzig, S., Venkateswarlu, K., Downward, J.,
and Cullen, P. J. (1999). Identification of the ras GTPase-activating protein
GAP1(m) as a phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate-binding protein in
vivo. Curr. Biol. 9, 265–268.
Miyawaki, A. (2003). Visualization of the spatial and temporal dynamics of
intracellular signaling. Dev. Cell 4, 295–305.
Meili, R., Ellsworth, C., Lee, S., Reddy, T. B., Ma, H., and Firtel, R. A. (1999).
Chemoattractant-mediated transient activation and membrane localization of
Akt/PKB is required for efficient chemotaxis to cAMP in Dictyostelium. EMBO
J. 18, 2092–2105.
Meili, R., and Firtel, R. A. (2003). Two poles and a compass. Cell 114, 153–156.

687

X. Xu et al.
Meinhardt, H. (1999). Orientation of chemotactic cells and growth cones:
models and mechanisms. J. Cell Sci. 112(Pt 17), 2867–2874.
Murphy, P. M. (1994). The molecular biology of leukocyte chemoattractant
receptors. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 12, 593– 633.
Parent, C. A., Blacklock, B. J., Froehlich, W. M., Murphy, D. B., and Devreotes,
P. N. (1998). G protein signaling events are activated at the leading edge of
chemotactic cells. Cell 95, 81–91.
Parent, C. A., and Devreotes, P. N. (1999). A cell’s sense of direction. Science
284, 765–770.
Park, K. C., Rivero, F., Meili, R., Lee, S., Apone, F., and Firtel, R. A. (2004). Rac
regulation of chemotaxis and morphogenesis in Dictyostelium. EMBO J. 23,
4177– 4189.
Postma, M., Bosgraaf, L., Loovers, H. M., and Van Haastert, P. J. (2004a).
Chemotaxis: signalling modules join hands at front and tail. EMBO Rep. 5,
35– 40.
Postma, M., Roelofs, J., Goedhart, J., Gadella, T. W., Visser, A. J., and Van
Haastert, P. J. (2003). Uniform cAMP stimulation of Dictyostelium cells induces
localized patches of signal transduction and pseudopodia. Mol. Biol. Cell 14,
5019 –5027.
Postma, M., Roelofs, J., Goedhart, J., Loovers, H. M., Visser, A.J., and Van
Haastert, P. J. (2004b). Sensitization of Dictyostelium chemotaxis by phosphoinositide-3-kinase-mediated self-organizing signalling patches. J. Cell Sci. 117,
2925–2935.
Postma, M., and Van Haastert, P. J. (2001). A diffusion-translocation model for
gradient sensing by chemotactic cells. Biophys. J. 81, 1314 –1323.
Rappel, W. J., Thomas, P. J., Levine, H., and Loomis, W. F. (2002). Establishing
direction during chemotaxis in eukaryotic cells. Biophys. J. 83, 1361–1367.
Rickert, P., Weiner, O. D., Wang, F., Bourne, H. R., and Servant, G. (2000).
Leukocytes navigate by compass: roles of PI3Kgamma and its lipid products.
Trends Cell Biol. 10, 466 – 473.
Sasaki, T. et al. (2000). Function of PI3Kgamma in thymocyte development, T
cell activation, and neutrophil migration. Science 287, 1040 –1046.
Segall, J. E. (1999). Cell polarization: chemotaxis gets CRACKing. Curr. Biol.
9, R46 –R48.
Sekar, R. B., and Periasamy, A. (2003). Fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) microscopy imaging of live cell protein localizations. J. Cell Biol. 160,
629 – 633.
Servant, G., Weiner, O. D., Herzmark, P., Balla, T., Sedat, J. W., and Bourne,
H. R. (2000). Polarization of chemoattractant receptor signaling during neutrophil chemotaxis. Science 287, 1037–1040.

688

Servant, G., Weiner, O. D., Neptune, E. R., Sedat, J.W., and Bourne, H. R.
(1999). Dynamics of a chemoattractant receptor in living neutrophils during
chemotaxis. Mol. Biol. Cell 10, 1163–1178.
Srinivasan, S., Wang, F., Glavas, S., Ott, A., Hofmann, F., Aktories, K., Kalman, D., and Bourne, H. R. (2003). Rac and Cdc42 play distinct roles in
regulating PI(3,4,5)P3 and polarity during neutrophil chemotaxis. J. Cell Biol.
160, 375–385.
Stephens, L., Ellson, C., and Hawkins, P. (2002). Roles of PI3Ks in leukocyte
chemotaxis and phagocytosis. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 14, 203–213.
Stoyanov, B. et al. (1995). Cloning and characterization of a G protein-activated human phosphoinositide-3 kinase. Science 269, 690 – 693.
Thelen, M. (2001). Dancing to the tune of chemokines. Nat. Immunol. 2,
129 –134.
Tuxworth, R. I., Cheetham, J. L., Machesky, L. M., Spiegelmann, G. B., Weeks,
G., and Insall, R. H. (1997). Dictyostelium RasG is required for normal motility
and cytokinesis, but not growth. J. Cell Biol. 138, 605– 614.
Ueda, M., Sako, Y., Tanaka, T., Devreotes, P., and Yanagida, T. (2001). Singlemolecule analysis of chemotactic signaling in Dictyostelium cells. Science 294,
864 – 867.
Wang, F., Herzmark, P., Weiner, O. D., Srinivasan, S., Servant, G., and Bourne,
H. R. (2002). Lipid products of PI(3)Ks maintain persistent cell polarity and
directed motility in neutrophils. Nat. Cell Biol. 4, 513–518.
Weiner, O. D., Neilsen, P. O., Prestwich, G. D., Kirschner, M.W., Cantley,
L. C., and Bourne, H. R. (2002). A PtdInsP(3)- and Rho GTPase-mediated
positive feedback loop regulates neutrophil polarity. Nat. Cell Biol. 4, 509 –
513.
Welch, H. C., Coadwell, W. J., Ellson, C. D., Ferguson, G. J., Andrews, S. R.,
Erdjument-Bromage, H., Tempst, P., Hawkins, P. T., and Stephens, L. R.
(2002). P-Rex1, a PtdIns(3,4,5)P3- and Gbetagamma-regulated guanine-nucleotide exchange factor for Rac. Cell 108, 809 – 821.
Xiao, Z., Zhang, N., Murphy, D. B., and Devreotes, P. N. (1997). Dynamic
distribution of chemoattractant receptors in living cells during chemotaxis
and persistent stimulation. J. Cell Biol. 139, 365–374.
Xu, J., Wang, F., Van Keymeulen, A., Herzmark, P., Straight, A., Kelly, K.,
Takuwa, Y., Sugimoto, N., Mitchison, T., and Bourne, H. R. (2003). Divergent
signals and cytoskeletal assemblies regulate self-organizing polarity in neutrophils. Cell 114, 201–214.
Zigmond, S. H. (1978). Chemotaxis by polymorphonuclear leukocytes. J. Cell
Biol. 77, 269 –287.
Zigmond, S. H., Levitsky, H. I., and Kreel, B. J. (1981). Cell polarity: an
examination of its behavioral expression and its consequences for polymorphonuclear leukocyte chemotaxis. J. Cell Biol. 89, 585–592.

Molecular Biology of the Cell

