MBoC | ARTICLE

A systems approach to investigate
GPCR-mediated Ras signaling network
in chemoattractant sensing
Xuehua Xua, Wei Quana, Fengkai Zhangb, and Tian Jina,*
a

Chemotaxis Signal Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852; bComputational Biology Section, Laboratory of Immune System
Biology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892

ABSTRACT A GPCR-mediated signaling network enables a chemotactic cell to generate adaptative Ras signaling in response to a large range of concentrations of a chemoattractant. To
explore potential regulatory mechanisms of GPCR-controlled Ras signaling in chemosensing,
we applied a software package, Simmune, to construct detailed spatiotemporal models simulating responses of the cAR1-mediated Ras signaling network. We first determined the dynamics of G-protein activation and Ras signaling in Dictyostelium cells in response to cAMP
stimulations using live-cell imaging and then constructed computation models by incorporating potential mechanisms. Using simulations, we validated the dynamics of signaling events
and predicted the dynamic profiles of those events in the cAR1-mediated Ras signaling networks with defective Ras inhibitory mechanisms, such as without RasGAP, with RasGAP overexpression, or with RasGAP hyperactivation. We describe a method of using Simmune to
construct spatiotemporal models of a signaling network and run computational simulations
without writing mathematical equations. This approach will help biologists to develop and
analyze computational models that parallel live-cell experiments.

Monitoring Editor
Carole Parent
University of Michigan
Received: Aug 19, 2020
Revised: Dec 1, 2021
Accepted: Dec 10, 2021

INTRODUCTION
Chemotaxis, the directional cell movement along chemoattractant
gradients (Chung et al., 2001; Iijima et al., 2002; Van Haastert and
Devreotes, 2004), is critical for diverse physiological and pathophysiological processes, such as the recruitment of leukocytes to sites of
infection, trafficking of lymphocytes throughout the human body,
metastasis of cancer cells, and development of the social amoeba
Dictyostelium discoideum (Jin et al., 2008; Chou et al., 2010; BravoCordero et al., 2012). To migrate in a wide range of chemoattractant
concentration gradients, cells need to rapidly terminate responses

This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press (http://www
.molbiolcell.org/cgi/doi/10.1091/mbc.E20-08-0545) on December 15, 2021.
*Address correspondence to: Tian Jin (tjin@niaid.nih.gov).
Abbreviations used: cAMP, 3’,5’-cyclic adenosine monophosphate; cAR1, cyclic
AMP receptor 1; FRET, fluorescence resonance energy transfer; GPCR, G-proteincoupled-receptor; IFFLP, incoherent feedforward loop with a proportional node;
NFBLB, negative feedback loop with a buffer node; RasGAP, Ras GTPase-activating protein; RasGEF, Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factor.
© 2021 Xu et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is available
to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial-Share Alike 4.0 International
Creative Commons License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0).
“ASCB®,” “The American Society for Cell Biology®,” and “Molecular Biology of
the Cell®” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology.

Molecular Biology of the Cell • 33:ar23, 1–15, March 1, 2022

to any given sustained stimulation and reset themselves, in a process called “adaptation” (Parent and Devreotes, 1999; Iijima et al.,
2002; Jin, 2013). One of the central questions in the study of eukaryotic chemotaxis is how a chemoattractant GPCR mediates intracellular pathways to achieve temporal “adaptation” and to respond to
a large range of concentrations (Meinhardt, 1999; Devreotes and
Janetopoulos, 2003; Jin, 2013). A theoretical study pointed out that
there are two major classes of simple network topology that can
possess adaptation (Ma et al., 2009). One type is the Negative
Feedback Loop with a Buffer node (NFBLB), and the other is the Incoherent Feedforward Loop with a Proportional node (IFFLP). In the
NFBLB model, a receptor stimulates an activator that causes output
to rise initially, and the output is shut down by an inhibitor induced
by the output itself. In the IFFLP model, a stimulus quickly turns the
activators on to produce an output and also proportionally activates
an inhibitor but with a delay in action to generate an adaptive output (Ma et al., 2009; Hoeller et al., 2014). Over the years, D. discoideum has been established as a model system for studying eukaryotic chemotaxis. This organism uses a GPCR, the cyclic AMP receptor
1 (cAR1), to detect its chemoattractant, cAMP, and to mediate chemotactic responses over a large range of concentrations (from 10–8
to 10–4 M) (Parent and Devreotes, 1999). Several conceptual models
33:ar23, 1  

have been proposed to explain how a receptor-controlled signaling
network may generate adaptation (Meinhardt, 1999; Parent and
Devreotes, 1999; Iijima et al., 2002; Takeda et al., 2012; Nakajima
et al., 2014). One of the earliest models is the Local Excitation and
Global Inhibition (LEGI) model (Parent and Devreotes, 1999). This
model consists of a fast and locally acting activator and a slow, globally controlled inhibitor, both of which are activated by external
stimuli (input). The response (output) is defined as the difference
between the levels of activation and inhibition. Thus, LEGI is an IFFLP-type model. These models help discuss the organizing principles of a signaling network for adaption, but they were constructed
by abstract modules rather than defined by specific molecules and
molecular interactions. To understand how signaling components
work together in a GPCR-mediated signaling network, we aimed for
constructing a detailed model based on specific molecular interactions, which would allow direct comparison with experimental data.
Simmune is a software package that applies an intuitive interface
to construct complex signaling networks based on the definition of
specific molecular interactions and the subcellular localization of
molecules, and it automatically translates the inputs into differential
equations that compute outputs into spatially resolved simulations
and dynamic representations of the signaling network (Meier-Schellersheim et al., 2009). Over the years, several models of signaling
networks were reported, including models of a chemoattractant
GPCR-controlled Ras signaling (Ma et al., 2004; Levine et al., 2006;
Takeda et al., 2012; Cheng and Othmer, 2016; Kamino et al., 2017).
These models were all constructed by writing mathematical equations “by hand,” which is defining each reaction for molecule complex formation, association/deassociation, or enzymatic transformation separately, and the tasks are time-consuming and very difficult
due to the large number of reaction equations. It is almost impossible for many experimental biologists to complete the tasks by themselves due to the requirements for math skills. The software package
Simmune allows people to construct signaling networks and to run
simulations without dealing with mathematical equations (MeierSchellersheim et al., 2009). The URL of the online official release of
Simmune is https://bioinformatics.niaid.nih.gov/simmune/.
The current version has three components: 1: The Simmune
Modeler for creating signaling networks, 2: The Simmune Cell
Designer for defining cellular morphologies, and 3: The Simmune
Simulator for running simulations (Materials and Methods). These
features allow biologists to develop and analyze computational
models that parallel live-cell experiments.
The cAR1 GPCR-controlled Ras activation is the first key signaling event that displays adaptation (Parent et al., 1998; Xu et al.,
2005; Takeda et al., 2012). The binding of chemoattractant cAMP to
cAR1 activates the GPCR that induces dissociation (or activation) of
heterotrimeric G-proteins into Gα2 and Gβγ subunits (Janetopoulos
et al., 2001; Xu et al., 2010). Activation of G-proteins regulates Ras
activation, which mediates downstream signaling events leading to
the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton for chemotaxis (Kae
et al., 2004; Sasaki et al., 2004; Charest et al., 2010; Kortholt et al.,
2011). Ras functions as a molecular switch existing in two states, an
inactive GDP-bound state and an active GTP-bound state. Ras is
activated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), which
catalyze the exchange of GDP for GTP, and is deactivated by GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), which stimulate the GTPase activity
that converts RasGTP to RasGDP (Insall et al., 1996; Kae et al., 2007;
Zhang et al., 2008; Charest et al., 2010). Several Ras isoforms are
activated by chemoattractant GPCRs in D. discoideum (Kae et al.,
2004; Sasaki et al., 2004) and neutrophils (Zheng et al., 1997). In D.
discoideum, two Ras isoforms, RasC and RasG, have been exten2 | X. Xu et al.

sively studied in cAR1-mediated signaling (Kae et al., 2007). It appears that RasC and RasG have their GTP-exchanging factors (GEFs)
and GAPs (Charest and Firtel, 2006; Kae et al., 2007; Zhang et al.,
2008). In the genome of D. discoideum, 18 genes encode potential
RasGAP proteins (Xu et al., 2017). Disruption of RasGAP, nf1, Ddnf1,
or c2gapA results in elevated Ras signaling and chemotaxis defects
(Zhang et al., 2008; Bloomfield et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2017). Activation of GPCR and G-proteins induces a translocation of C2GAP1
from cytosol to the cell membrane, where it functions as a Ras inhibitor (Xu et al., 2017). Chemoattractant GPCR-mediated membrane
translocation and activation of C2GAP1 requires Ras proteins on the
membrane (Xu et al., 2017), indicating the involvement of an NFBLB
mechanism. Despite this progress, it is still not clear how GPCRs
regulate RasGAP activities and how many RasGAP proteins are involved in chemotaxis.
In this study, we first experimentally determined the dynamics of
G-protein activation and Ras activation in response to various cAMP
stimuli using live-cell imaging. Our quantitative measurements provided dynamic profiles of signaling events, including ligand binding
to GPCR, activation of heterotrimeric G-proteins, and Ras activation.
These dynamics provided the foundation for evaluating and modifying quantitative models based on molecular interactions. To investigate the regulatory mechanism of Ras inhibitor RasGAP, we proposed that RasGAP is activated by either Gα2-GTP, Ras-GTP, or
both Gα2-GTP and Ras-GTP, which represent a model of IFFLP-only,
NFBLB-only, or combined IFFLP+NFBLB, respectively. Using Simmune, we built mechanistic models and carried out computer simulations. Our study explored potential mechanisms underlying cAR1mediated RasGAP activation and predicted dynamic profiles of
signaling events in the cAR1-mediated Ras signaling network with
no RasGAP, overexpressing RasGAP, or hyperactive RasGAP. Importantly, we describe a protocol using Simmune to construct spatiotemporal models of a signaling network and to run computational
simulations without writing mathematical equations.

RESULTS
Kinetics of Ras signaling in response to two cAMP
stimulations
We and others have developed techniques to image cAMP concentration using a fluorescent dye, G-protein activation using fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) imaging, and Ras activation
using an active Ras probe, RBD-GFP, to determine the kinetics of ligand concentration and activation of G-protein and Ras in a single
living cell upon cAMP stimulations (Figure 1A). Cells display a persistent activation of G-proteins (Janetopoulos et al., 2001; Xu et al.,
2005) and a transient Ras activation in response to stimulation of
cAMP at different concentrations (Parent et al., 1998; Xu et al.,
2005). To determine the dynamics of cAMP-induced activation and
deactivation of Ras signaling, we simultaneously imaged the dynamics of cAMP changes around cells and Ras activation in the cells that
were sequentially exposed to a uniform cAMP stimulation followed
by a withdrawal of the stimulation and then a second cAMP stimulation (Figure 1B). cAMP (1 μM [10–6 M]) mixed with a fluorescent dye,
Alexa 594, was first applied to the cells at time 0 s and removed
from the cells at 150 s. At 200 s, 1 μM cAMP was reapplied to the
cells. Temporal changes of cAMP stimuli were measured by imaging
Alexa 594 around the cells (Figure 1B, top panel). In response to
cAMP stimuli, RBD-GFP quickly translocated to the cell membrane
and then returned to a low and steady level (Figure 1B, bottom
panel). Upon removal of the cAMP stimulation at 150 s, the amount
of membrane-bound RBD-GFP further decreased to reach the prestimulus level. This result showed that activation of cAR1 induces a
Molecular Biology of the Cell

previous response (from 0 to 50 s) (Figure
1B), indicating that the signaling network
returned to prestimulus states in less than
1 min following the removal of previous
cAMP stimuli, and thus the network can
properly respond to other stimuli.

Kinetics of G-protein dissociation
and Ras activation in response to a
two-step cAMP stimulation

FIGURE 1: (A) Scheme of the cAR1 GPCR signaling network contains the following signaling
steps: ligand/GPCR interaction, G-protein activation, and Ras activation. Fluorescent imaging
methods were developed to monitor cAMP concentration (fluorescent dye), G-protein activation
(FRET method), Ras activation (fluorescence probe: active Ras binding domain tagged with GFP,
RBD-GFP). (B) Dynamics of Ras activation in response to two identical cAMP stimulations. Top
panel shows the temporal changes in cAMP concentration around the cell visualized by mixing
fluorescent dye Alexa 594 with 10–6 M cAMP. The bottom panel shows Ras activation in the cells
expressing RBD-GFP. To facilitate quantitative measurement, the immobile cells were obtained
by treatment with the actin polymerization inhibitor latrunculin B (1 μM). (C) Kinetics of signaling
events induced by two-step sustained cAMP stimulation. Top panel shows the kinetics of
G-protein activation measured as FRET changes on the membrane of single live cells in response
to 10 nM and 10 μM cAMP, which were uniformly applied at 0 and 75 s. A normalized FRET
change is expressed as the CFP/YFP ratio. The kinetics of cAMP-induced changes in FRET ratio
are shown in the time course. The bottom panel shows the dynamics of Ras activation measured
by the level of RBD-GFP on the membrane. Temporal changes in RBD-GFP on the membrane
are shown in the time course in response to 10 nM and 10 μM cAMP, which were uniformly
applied at time points shown as red arrows.

transient Ras activation; however, for the duration of the cAMP stimulus (1 μM), the level of Ras activation did not return to the prestimulus level, indicating that adaptation of Ras signaling is not complete.
Following the removal of cAMP from 150 to 200 s, signaling events
of both heterotrimeric G-protein (Xu et al, 2007) and Ras quickly
deactivated and returned to the prestimulus states (Figure 1B).
When cAMP was reapplied at 200 s, the cells generated another
transient Ras activation (from 200 to 250 s) that is identical to the
Volume 33 March 1, 2022

One key feature of the cAR1-controlled signaling network is that the network can reset
its activity in response to a static cAMP concentration and then responds to another increase in cAMP concentration followed by
adaptation (Devreotes and Steck, 1979; Parent and Devreotes, 1999; Hoeller et al.,
2014). We measured the kinetics of two
cAR1-induced G-protein activation and Ras
activation, in response to two sustained
cAMP stimulations, a low dose (10 nM or
10–8 M) followed by a high dose (10 μM or
10–5 M) (Figure 1C). We monitored the Gprotein dissociation (activation) by assessing
FRET changes between Gα2-CFP and GβYFP (Janetopoulos et al., 2001; Xu et al.,
2005), and Ras activation by analyzing
changes in membrane-bound RBD-GFP
(Sasaki et al., 2004). The kinetics of G-protein dissociation showed a pattern of two
step–like persistent increases (Figure 1C,
top panel). In contrast, the kinetics of Ras
activation showed two transient responses
(Figure 1C, bottom panel) where the first
stimulation (10 nM or 10–8 M) induced a response followed by a nearly perfect adaptation, while the second stimulation (10 μM or
10–5 M) triggered another response followed by an imperfect adaptation. A previous study also reported that cAMP-induced
Ras activation displays the imperfect adaptation (Nakajima et al., 2014).

Three different models of
GPCR-mediated Ras signaling

To investigate the potential regulatory
mechanisms of the inhibitor of Ras signaling,
we built three models of a cAR1/G-protein–
mediated Ras signaling (Figure 2A). Each
model included the same mechanisms of ligand binding to cAR1 GPCR, G-protein dissociation into Gα2GTP and free Gβγ, and
free Gβγ-activating RasGEF to induce Ras
activation. A previous study proposed a
molecular mechanism controlling RasGEF to regulate Ras activity in
a model in which Gα-GTP recruits RasGEF from cytosol to cell membrane and then free Gβγ activates RasGEF (Cheng and Othmer,
2016). Because the regulatory mechanism of RasGEF has not been
determined, we simply defined that free Gβγ serves as RasGEF that
interacts with Ras to convert Ras-GDP to Ras-GTP in our current
models. To study the regulation of RasGAP, we incorporated different activating mechanisms of RasGAP, which are by Gα2-GTP alone
Modeling of GPCR-mediated chemosensing

| 3

FIGURE 2: Construction of a signaling network based on molecular interactions using the
Simmune Modeler. (A) Scheme shows a GPCR-mediated activation (dissociation) of G-protein
into Gα-GTP and Gβγ and activation of Ras. RasGEF is activated by Gβγ and promotes the
conversion of Ras-GDP to Ras-GTP. RasGAP is activated by both Gα-GTP (indicated as IFFLP)
and Ras-GTP (indicated as NFBLB). Upon activation, RasGAP becomes membrane-bound, and
this change promotes the conversion of Ras-GTP to Ras-GDP (indicated as signaling event 4).
(B) Top panel shows the interaction between a ligand (one circle with binding site 1) and
extracellular domain of the receptor (one circle with binding site 3). The binding leads to the
activation of the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor, which is indicated by the red square
switching from an empty square (inactive) to a filled square (active). The bottom panel shows
that the active receptor associates with heterotrimeric G-protein, Gα-GDP (middle circle with
binding sites 1 and 2), and Gβγ (left circle with bind site 2) to form an active receptor/G-protein
complex. (C) Signaling network of a GPCR-mediated heterotrimeric G-protein dissociation into
Gα-GTP and Gβγ, which in turn activate Ras through RasGEF and RasGAP. To simplify modeling,
free Gβγ serves as RasGEF, which interacts with Ras to convert Ras-GDP to Ras-GTP. RasGAP is
activated by both Gα2-GTP and Ras-GTP.

(IFFLP), Ras-GTP alone (NFBLB), or both Gα2-GTP and Ras-GTP
(IFFLP+NFBLB).
Using the Simmune Modeler (Zhang et al., 2013), we constructed
three signaling networks of a cAR1-mediated Ras signaling network
based on molecular interactions (Figure 2, B and C). Specifically, we
4 | X. Xu et al.

defined molecular complexes and their biochemistry involved in Ras signaling networks, including binding sites, domain status (for example, active or inactive states),
parameters for molecular complex association/dissociation, and transformation processes (Figure 2B). After inputting these
specifications, the Simmune Modeler generated a signaling network (Figure 2C). We
then defined a three-dimensional (3D) digital cell as a spherical object (10 μm in diameter) with membrane and cytosol regions
using the Simmune Cell Designer (Figure
3A) (Angermann et al., 2012). Then, we simulated cellular response by defining initial
simulation state conditions and “stimulating” the digital cell with cAMP stimulations
applied in our wet-lab assays using the Simmune Simulator. (Figure 3B). To select the
parameters of the molecules in each model,
we first defined parameters based on earlier
experiments and assumptions, then simulated the dynamics of signaling events, and
finally modified the parameters to fit the
simulated dynamics to the experimentally
measured dynamics of signaling events. To
carry out simulations, we started with a set
of parameters and specified the initial biochemistry of the modeled signaling networks and then allowed the simulated cell
to equilibrate to a stable (prestimulus) state
for 300 s. We then applied stimulations corresponding to the wet-lab experiments and
followed the time evolution of the concentrations of the involved molecular species.
Numbers of molecules or molecular complexes in selected regions of the model cells
were visualized and plotted as a function of
time (Figure 3C). We thus retrieved the spatiotemporal dynamics of each signaling
event in a way that permits direct comparison with the real biological systems, thereby
allowing us to evaluate models and modify
parameters for better agreement between
model and experiment. Using trial and error,
we identified a set of parameters for each
model (Table 1) that allows the simulated
cell to generate transient and adaptive Ras
signaling (Figure 4).

Simulated dynamics of
GPCR-controlled Ras signaling in
response to uniform stimuli

Using the Simmune Simulator, we simulated
responses in a modeled cell with a cAR1mediated Ras signaling network with three
different deactivation mechanisms by RasGAP: IFFLP model by Gα2-GTP alone (Figure 4A), NFBLB model by
Ras-GTP alone (Figure 4B), or IFFLP+NFBLB model by Gα2-GTP
and Ras-GTP (Figure 4C). After the modeled cell equilibrated to a
prestimulus state for 299 s, a cAMP stimulation was uniformly applied to the cell at 300 s. In response to stimulations at different
Molecular Biology of the Cell

and G-protein that reflected cAMP concentrations and a transient
Ras activation (Ras-GTP) followed by an imperfect adaptation; simulated dynamics of G-protein activation and Ras activation matched
well with the dynamic profiles that were experimentally determined.
Each model was able to respond to a large range of cAMP concentrations (from 10–9 to 10–4 M), as real cells do, indicating that
a GPCR-mediated signaling network with IFFLP, NFBLB, or
IFFLP+NFBLB is sufficient to produce adaptive Ras signaling in response to a large range of cAMP concentrations.
Each model predicted the dynamics of active-RasGEF (RasGEF)
and active-RasGAP (RasGAP) (Figure 4). The dynamics of RasGEF
and RasGAP displayed the following features. First, a stimulus proportionally activated both RasGEF and RasGAP. Second, the stimulation-induced activation of RasGEF increased faster than that of
RasGAP. Third, when the activation of RasGEF and RasGAP reached
a balance, Ras signaling began to adapt and reached a lower and
steady level at a later time point. However, because RasGAP is activated by different mechanisms in each model, its dynamic profiles
differed among the three models. The dynamics of RasGAP in
Figure 4, A and C, were similar, while the profile of RasGAP in Figure
4B differed from those shown in Figure 4, A and C, was transient,
and returned to lower levels. Interestingly, because each model was
able to produce an imperfect adaptation of Ras signaling, our computational simulations showed that RasGAP could be activated by
either an IFFLP mechanism (such as by Gα-GTP in Figure 4A) or an
NFBLB mechanism (such as by Ras-GTP in Figure 4B) or by a combination of IFFLP and NFBLB mechanisms (such as by both Gα-GTP
and Ras-GTP in Figure 4C) in chemotactic cells.

Simulated dynamics of GPCR-controlled Ras in response to
two cAMP stimulations

FIGURE 3: Simmune software consists of three components: the
Simmune Modeler defines molecules and constructs the signaling
network, the Simmune Cell Designer defines cell geometry, and the
Simmune simulator runs computer simulations. Construction of a
signaling network based on molecular interactionsusing the Simmune
Modeler (Figure 2). (A) Defining a 3D digital cell using the Simmune
Cell Designer; 10 μm diameter. (B) Interface of computer simulations
using the Simmune Simulator. A digital cell is exposed to a gradient of
cAMP. Rainbow color indicates the concentration changes around the
cell. (C) Once the simulation is run, the dynamic changes of any
component can be obtained in a selected region.

concentrations (10–9 M orange, 10–8 light blue, 10–7 purple, 10–6
green, 10–5 brown, and 10–4 dark blue, respectively), a model cell
with an IFFLP mechanism (Figure 4A), an NFBLB mechanism (Figure
4B), or an IFFLP+NFBLB mechanism (Figure 4C) generated signaling
events as shown in the cAMP/GPCR complex, G-protein activation,
Ras-GTP, activated-RasGEF, and activated-RasGAP. Each cell generated persistent activations of GPCR (cAMP/GPCR complex)
Volume 33 March 1, 2022

We simulated the dynamics of the modeled cell in response to two
cAMP stimulations (Figure 5). After the modeled cell equilibrated to
a stable state for 300 s, cAMP (1 μM) was applied to the cell at 300
s, remained until 399 s, was removed from the cell at 400 s, and was
then reapplied to the cell at 500 s. We found that each model generated dynamics of the signaling events, including cAMP/GPCR
(GPCR activation), G-protein activation, and Ras-GTP (Figure 5,
A–C), that matched well those measured in live-cell experiments
(Figure 1B) (Xu et al., 2007). A sudden increase in binding of cAMP
to its receptor (cAMP/GPCR) from 300 to 399 s induced a persistent
G-protein activation and a transient increase of Ras-GTP (activation).
From 300 to 399 s, the level of Ras-GTP did not return to the prestimulus level, showing an imperfect Ras adaptation. Following the
removal of cAMP from 399 to 499 s, the signaling events of G-protein activation and Ras-GTP quickly returned to the prestimulus
states (Figure 5, A–C), showing that the signaling network returned
to prestimulus states in less than 1 min following the removal of
cAMP and was able to respond to another stimulation at 500 s. Our
simulations also predicted the dynamics of RasGEF and RasGAP in
response to the sudden increase in cAMP at 300 s, the withdrawal
of the stimulations at 399 s, and another increase of cAMP/GPCR at
500 s. Our results indicated that a signaling network with an IFFLP
(Figure 5A), NFBLB (Figure 5B), or IFFLP+NFBLB (Figure 5C) mechanism can respond to stimulation, quickly reset the network to a prestimulus state when the stimulation is removed, and respond to
another stimulation.

Simulated dynamics of GPCR-controlled Ras signaling in
response to two step–wise cAMP stimulations
We simulated the dynamics of the modeled cells in response to
two step–wise cAMP stimulations (Figure 6). After the model cell
Modeling of GPCR-mediated chemosensing

| 5

Associations (l/mol s)

Dissociations (/s)

Figure 4C. RasGAP activated by Ga2 and RasGTPa

Ligand_GPCR
binding—10,000,000

Ligand_act-GPCR
dissoc—1

Ligand_GPCR
Receptor_Gabg

Receptor_Gabg
binding—50,000

rec act ga gdp
dissoc—0.01

Ga2_Gbg

GDP-Ga_Gbg assoc—
1e-06

Transformations (/s)

Initial conditions
GPCR-basal: 50

GPCR activation—3

Ga2_Gbg_3 basal: 50

rec act ga gtp
dissoc—10

Ras-GDP: 50

rec inact ga dissoc—10

RasGAP_basal: 1e-06

Ga-GTP_Gbg
dissoc—10
gabg-gdp dissoc—1e-03

Ga2
Ga2_Rasgap

G alpha auto GTPase—3
Ga2-GDP_RasGAP inact
assoc—0.01

Ga2-GTP_RasGAP
dissoc—2e-03

Ga2-GTP_RasGAP
assoc—0.01

Ga2-GDP_RasGAP inact
dissoc—2e-03

Ga2-GTP_RasGAP
activation—100

RasGAP_Ga2-GTP
assoc—1e06
Gbg_Ras

Gbg_Ras assoc—1e-06

Gbg_Ras dissoc—1e-03

Gbg_Ras
activation—100

Ras_RasGAP

Ras_RasGAP assoc—
1e-08

Ras-GTP_RasGAP
dissoc—1e-03

Ras-GTP_RasGAP
activation—100

RasGAP_RasGTP
assoc—1e-05

Ras_RasGAP dissoc—
1e-03

Ras_RasGAP
deactivation—1e-03

RasGDP_RasGAP
inactive assoc—-0.1

RasGDP_RasGAP
inactive dissoc—0.1

RasGAP

RasGAP
deactivation—0.03

Figure 4A. RasGAP is
activated by Ga2b
Ligand_GPCR

Ligand_GPCR binding—
10,000,000

Ligand_act-GPCR
dissoc—1

Receptor_Gabg

Receptor_Gabg
binding—50,000

rec act ga gdp
dissoc—0.01

Ga2_Gbg

GDP-Ga_Gbg assoc—
1e-06

GPCR-basal: 50
GPCR activation—3

Ga2_Gbg_3 basal: 50

rec act ga gtp
dissoc—10

Ras-GDP: 50

rec inact ga dissoc—10

RasGAP_8: 0.0001

Ga-GTP_Gbg
dissoc—10
gabg-gdp dissoc—1e-03

Ga2
Ga2_Rasgap

G alpha auto GTPase—3
Ga2-GDP_RasGAP inact
assoc—0.01

Ga2-GTP_RasGAP
dissoc—2e-03

Ga2-GTP_RasGAP
assoc—0.01

Ga2-GDP_RasGAP inact
dissoc—2e-03

Ga2-GTP_RasGAP
activation—100

RasGAP_Ga2-GTP
assoc—1e-06
Gbg_Ras

Gbg_Ras assoc—1e-06

Gbg_Ras dissoc—1e-03

TABLE 1: One set of parameters for each of the three models.

6 | X. Xu et al.

Gbg_Ras
activation—100
(Continues)

Molecular Biology of the Cell

Ras_RasGAP

Associations (l/mol s)

Dissociations (/s)

Transformations (/s)

Ras_RasGAP assoc—
1e-07

Ras-GTP_RasGAP
dissoc—0

Ras-GTP_RasGAP
activation—0

RasGAP_RasGTP
assoc—0

Ras_RasGAP dissoc—
1e-09

Ras_RasGAP
deactivation—1e-03

RasGDP_RasGAP
inactive assoc—0

RasGDP_RasGAP
inactive dissoc—0

RasGAP

RasGAP deactivation—0.06

Ras

Ras auto GTPase—3

Initial conditions

Figure 4B. RasGAP is
activated by Rasc
Ligand_GPCR

Ligand_GPCR
binding—10,000,000

Ligand_act-GPCR
dissoc—1

Receptor_Gabg

Receptor_Gabg
binding—50,000

rec act ga gdp
dissoc—0.01

Ga2_Gbg

GDP-Ga_Gbg assoc—
1e-06

GPCR-basal: 50
GPCR activation—3

Ga2_Gbg_3 basal: 50

rec act ga gtp
dissoc—10

Ras-GDP: 50

rec inact ga dissoc—10

RasGAP_basal: 1e-06

Ga-GTP_Gbg
dissoc—10
gabg-gdp dissoc—1e-03

Ga2
Ga2_Rasgap

G alpha auto GTPase—3
Ga2-GDP_RasGAP inact
assoc—0

Ga2-GTP_RasGAP
dissoc—0

Ga2-GTP_RasGAP
assoc—0

Ga2-GDP_RasGAP inact
dissoc—0

Ga2-GTP_RasGAP
activation—0

RasGAP_Ga2-GTP
assoc—0
Gbg_Ras

Gbg_Ras assoc—1e-07

Gbg_Ras dissoc—1e-03

Gbg_Ras activation—
1e-03

Ras_RasGAP

Ras_RasGAP assoc—
1e-09

Ras-GTP_RasGAP
dissoc—1e-05

Ras-GTP_RasGAP
activation—100

RasGAP_RasGTP
assoc—1e-06

Ras_RasGAP dissoc—
1e=04

Ras_RasGAP
deactivation—1e-09

RasGDP_RasGAP
inactive assoc—0.1

RasGDP_RasGAP
inactive dissoc—0.1

RasGAP

RasGAP
deactivation—0.03

Diffusion coefficients [m^2/s]. Member proteins: GPCR: 1.0e-15, Ras: 1.0e-13, Gβγ: 1.0e-13, and Gα 1.0e-13. All cytosolic components (such as RasGAP) 1.0 e-11.
The set of parameters for the model of Figure 4C in which RasGAP is activated by both Gα-GTP and Ras-GTP.
The set of parameters for the model of Figure 4A in which RasGAP is activated by Gα-GTP.
The set of parameters for the model of Figure 4B in which RasGAP is activated by Ras-GTP.

TABLE 1: One set of parameters for each of the three models. Continued

equilibrated to a stable state for 300 s, a low dose of cAMP
stimulation (10 nM or 10–8 M) was applied to the cell at 300 s followed by a high dose of cAMP stimulation (10 μM or 10–5 M) at
400 s (Figure 6). In response to two step–wise cAMP stimulations,
each model generated two step–like persistent increases in
GPCR activation (cAMP/GPCR) and G-protein activation and two
transient responses in Ras-GTP (Figure 6, A–C). Simulated

Volume 33 March 1, 2022

dynamic profiles of G-protein activation and Ras-GTP of each
model matched those measured in live-cell experiments (Figure
1C). Each of the three models also predicted the dynamics
of active RasGEF and active RasGAP. Our simulations indicate
that each model can reset its activity and adapt to a static stimulation and then respond to another stimulation followed by
adaptation.

Modeling of GPCR-mediated chemosensing

| 7

FIGURE 4: Simulated dynamics of five signaling steps in response to uniformly applied cAMP stimulation. The signaling
networks (A–C) have different RasGAP regulatory mechanisms: Panel A shows that RasGAP is activated by Gα-GTP
alone, panel B shows that RasGAP is activated by Ras-GTP alone, and panel C shows RasGAP is activated by both
Gα-GTP and Ras-GTP. Simulated dynamics of five signaling steps in three signaling networks include the complex of
cAMP/GPCR, G-protein activation, Ras-GTP, RasGEF, and RasGAP in response to uniformly applied cAMP stimulations
at concentrations of 10–9 (yellow), 10–8 (light blue), 10–7 (purple), 10–6 (green), 10–5 (brown), and 10–4 (dark blue) M.

8 | X. Xu et al.

Molecular Biology of the Cell

FIGURE 5: Simulated dynamics of five signaling events in response to two identical cAMP stimulations. The signaling
networks have different RasGAP regulatory mechanisms: RasGAP is activated by Gα-GTP alone (A: IFFLP), by Ras-GTP
alone (B: NFBLB), and by both Gα-GTP and Ras-GTP (C: IFFLP+NFBLB). Simulated dynamics of five signaling steps
include cAMP/GPCR, G-protein activation, Ras-GTP, RasGEF, and RasGAP in response to two cAMP stimulations.

Dynamic behaviors of the signaling network with defective
RasGAPs
To explore how mutations in RasGAP affect dynamic behaviors of
the signaling network, we generated RasGAP mutations in silico
using the model with the IFFLP+NFBLB mechanism (shown in
Figure 4C) and then carried out simulations (Figure 7). Using Simmune, we first deleted RasGAP from the network by setting its

Volume 33 March 1, 2022

concentration to 0 and allowed the modeled cell lacking RasGAP
(rasGAP-) to equilibrate to its basal (prestimulated) state from 0 to
300 s. In response to cAMP (1 μM or 10–6 M) stimulation applied at
300 s, the rasGAP- cell generated dynamics of the signaling events
(blue curves), which are shown with those from the wild-type (WT)
modeled cell (red curves) (Figure 7A). We found that the rasGAPcell displayed unchanged dynamics at the signaling events of

Modeling of GPCR-mediated chemosensing

| 9

FIGURE 6: Simulated dynamics of five signaling events in response to a two-step cAMP stimulation. The signaling
networks have different RasGAP regulatory mechanisms: RasGAP is activated by Gα-GTP alone (A: IFFLP), by Ras-GTP
alone (B: NFBLB), and by both Gα-GTP and Ras-GTP (C: IFFLP+NFBLB). Simulated dynamics of five signaling steps
include cAMP/GPCR, G-protein activation, Ras-GTP, RasGEF, and RasGAP in response to a two-step cAMP stimulation.

ligand/GPCR, G-protein activation, and RasGEF, while Ras-GTP
dynamics changed dramatically. Ras-GTP remained at a fully activated level even before the cAMP stimulation, and cAMP stimulation could not further activate Ras signaling (Ras-GTP, blue curve in
Figure 7A), demonstrating that receptor-induced inhibition of Ras
is essential for a network to produce a transient and adaptive Ras
signaling.
To elevate RasGAP activity, we increased either the number of
RasGAP molecules by 1000-fold (overexpressing RasGAP,
10 | X. Xu et al.

RasGAPOE: a blue curve in Figure 7B) or the activity of GAP by 1000fold (hyperactive RasGAP, RasGAPHA: blue curves in Figure 7C) in
silico and simulated the responses of the two mutant networks to
cAMP stimulation. The modeled cell was stimulated with cAMP
(10–6 M) at 300 s, and the simulated dynamics of signaling events
(blue curves) were compared with those from the WT signaling network (red curves in Figure 7). As expected, Ras signaling could no
longer be activated by the cAMP stimulation (Ras-GTP; blue curves
in Figure 7, B and C) in the signaling network with either
Molecular Biology of the Cell

FIGURE 7: Simulated dynamics of signaling events in networks with mutated RasGAPs. (A) Simulated dynamics of five
signaling events in the signaling network without RasGAP (blue) and with normal RasGAP (red) in response to uniformly
applied cAMP (10–6 M). (B) Simulated dynamics of five signaling events in the signaling network with overexpressed
RasGAP (RasGAPOE, blue) and with normal RasGAP (red) in response to uniformly applied cAMP (10–6 M). (C) Simulated
dynamics of five signaling events in the signaling network with hyperactive RasGAP (RasGAPHA, blue) and with normal
RasGAP (red).

Volume 33 March 1, 2022

Modeling of GPCR-mediated chemosensing

| 11

overexpressing RasGAP (Figure 7B) or hyperactive RasGAP (Figure
7C). However, overexpressing RasGAP, unlike hyperactive RasGAP,
significantly altered the dynamics of G-protein activation and RasGEF (Figure 7, B and C). Because the WT model uses a combination
of IFFLP and NFBLB mechanisms, RasGAP has two binding sites,
one for Gα-GTP and the other for Ras-GTP. Therefore, increasing
the number of RasGAP would elevate the numbers of both Gα-GTPRasGAP and RasGAP-RasGTP complexes, thereby reducing the
number of Gα-GDP, which resulted in a significant increase in the
number of free Gβγ upon cAMP stimulation, and the elevation of
free Gβγ caused a clear increase in active RasGEF (Figure 7B). In
contrast, increasing the activity of only RasGAP would not significantly change the numbers of either the Gα-GTP-RasGAP or the
RasGAP-RasGTP complex and therefore would not affect the dynamics of free Gβγ and RasGEF (Figure 7C). Here, we computationally studied the functions of RasGAP in a GPCR-mediated Ras adaptation by simulating and comparing the dynamic behaviors of a
signaling network with WT RasGAP, deletion of RasGAP, overexpressing RasGAP, or hyperactive RasGAP. This strategy can be used
to computationally explore functions of any given component and
to mathematically predict the effects of a given mutation in the signaling network.

Simulated spatiotemporal dynamics of signaling events in
response to cAMP gradients
We tested how each model performs in response to cAMP gradients (Figure 8). We tracked five signaling events upon exposure to a
cAMP gradient (1 μM or 10–6 M at the front and 0.5 μM or 0.5 × 10–6
M at the back): ligand/GPCR, G-protein activation, Ras-GTP, RasGEF, and RasGAP, in both the front and back regions of the modeled cell. The results are shown in Figure 8, A, C, and E. The dynamic profiles of ligand/GPCR, G-protein activation, and Ras-GTP in
both the front and back regions are similar in all three models, and
these profiles closely resembled those measured experimentally in
real cells (Xu et al., 2005). Our simulations also predicted the spatiotemporal dynamics of active RasGEF and active RasGAP in the modeled cell in response to a cAMP gradient. We found that each of the
three adaptation models showed increasing responses along the
hierarchy of the five signaling steps, ligand/GPCR, G-protein activation, Ras-GTP, RasGEF, and RasGAP, in the front regions. However,
the differences between the front and back regions for each signaling event were not significant in any of the three models under
these stimulation conditions, indicating that there was no significant
spatial amplification at these signaling steps.
To further test our models in response to a much steeper cAMP
gradient, we simulated the dynamic responses of a modeled cell exposed to 10 μM (10–5 M) cAMP at the front and 100 nM (10–7 M) at the
back (Figure 8, B, D, and F). Our simulations showed that the dynamic
patterns of each signaling step remained like those generated when
the modeled cell is exposed to uniform stimuli (Figure 4, A–C) and a
shallow gradient (Figure 8, A, C, and E). We found that a stronger
stimulus in the front region of the cell induced higher local responses
in the front than in the back for ligand/GPCR, G-protein activation,
Ras-GTP, active RasGEF, and active RasGAP. The steeper gradient
induced increasing differences at each signaling step. Our simulations indicated that our adaptation models can generate directional
responses but without significant spatial amplification at the signaling
steps, including ligand/GPCR, G-protein activation, Ras-GTP, active
RasGEF, and active RasGAP, between the front and back regions in
response to gradients at different concentrations and/or steepness.
Amplification of the directional information provided at the receptor
level thus likely occurs downstream of the Ras signaling.
12 | X. Xu et al.

DISCUSSION
In this study, we describe an approach with the combination of experimental measurements and computational modeling to investigate a chemoattractant GPCR-mediated Ras signaling network. We
first determined the spatiotemporal dynamics of Ras signaling in
response to various cAMP stimuli using live-cell imaging and then
constructed computational models of a GPCR-mediated Ras signaling network by incorporating possible regulatory mechanisms of
Ras signaling, selected a set of parameters for each model, and
simulated the dynamic profiles of signaling events using Simmune,
a software package. We constructed detailed computational models that allow us to simulate how a GPCR-mediated signaling network organizes at a molecular level, dynamically encodes information at each signaling step, and systematically produces outputs of
adaptive Ras signaling.
Experimentally, we revealed the dynamics of cAR1-mediated Ras
activation in live cells in response to various cAMP stimuli. From
previous and current studies, we and others determined the dynamic profiles of cAR1-mediated signaling events, including ligand/
GPCR (Ueda et al., 2001; Xu et al., 2005), G-protein activation (Janetopoulos et al., 2001; Xu et al., 2005), and Ras signaling (Sasaki
et al., 2004; Kortholt et al., 2013), in a cell system without the complications associated with additional feedback regulation from the
actin cytoskeletal system (Huang et al., 2013). Upon a uniform cAMP
stimulation (Figure 1), cells generated a persistent G-protein dissociation (activation) and a transient Ras activation, followed by an
imperfect adaptation process of Ras signaling. When the stimulation
was withdrawn (Figure 1B), each of the cAR1-mediated signaling
events in the cell quickly returned to the basal (prestimulus) levels
and became ready to respond to another stimulation. In response to
a two-step increase in the concentration of uniformly applied cAMP
stimuli (Figure 1C), each signaling event showed distinct kinetic patterns: G-protein displayed a step-like persistent dissociation/activation, while Ras showed two transient activations with an imperfect
adaptation. Our measured dynamics of several signaling events
serve as the foundation for our testing of computational models and
exploring possible mechanisms of cAR1-mediated activation of RasGEF and RasGAP, which controls activation and deactivation of Ras.
It is still not clear how the GPCR/G-protein machinery controls
the activities of Ras regulators, such as RasGEF and RasGAP, to
achieve adaptation in Ras signaling in chemotaxing cells. Many conceptual models of a chemoattractant GPCR-mediated signaling network have been proposed, and all of them are the IFFLP type (Parent and Devreotes, 1999; Takeda et al., 2012). Meier-Schellersheim
et al. (2006) reported a detailed cAR1-mediated chemosensing
model in which RasGAP is activated by Gα2-GTP, which belongs to
an IFFLP topology. In the current study, we constructed three models by incorporating different activation mechanisms of RasGAP by
cAR1, including activation by Gα-GTP, an IFFLP type (Figure 4A); by
Ras-GTP, an NFBLB type (Figure 4B); or both Gα-GTP and Ras-GTP,
a combination of IFFLP and NFBLB types (Figure 4C). Through trial
and error, we selected one set of parameters for each model that
was able to reproduce the characteristics of the experimentally observed imperfect Ras adaptation (Figure 4, A–C). Each model also
performed well in response to two cAMP stimulations (Figure 5,
A–C) or two step-wise cAMP stimulations (Figure 6, A–C), indicating
that the signaling network in each model can properly respond to a
large range of chemoattractant concentrations, to quickly return to
the prestimulus stage when the stimulation is withdrawn, and to
adapt to a sustained stimulus and be ready to respond to another
stimulation. Furthermore, each model can produce directional
responses to cAMP gradients (Figure 8), indicating their spatial
Molecular Biology of the Cell

FIGURE 8: Simulated spatiotemporal dynamics of signaling events in response to cAMP gradients. (A, C, E) In response
to a cAMP gradient (10–6 M in the front region and 0.5 × 10–6 M in the back region), simulated dynamics of five signaling
events in the front (blue curves) and back (red curves) regions of the digital cell with the signaling networks shown in
Figure 6, A, B, and C, respectively. (B, D, F) In response to a cAMP gradient (10–5 M at the front and 10–7 M at the back),
simulated dynamics of five signaling events in the front (blue curves) and the back region of the digital cell with the
signaling networks of IFFLP only (A, B), NFBLB only (C, D) and IFFLP+NFBLB (E, F), respectively.

sensing ability. In this study, we did not determine the space of possible parameter values that define each model. Future study is
needed to scan parameters and determine parameter space for
models, thereby helping us to determine which model is more likely
to represent the real cell.
Many sensory systems in cells and organisms share a property
called fold-change detection (FCD), which describes a system that is
sensitive to the fold change in the input signal and not to the absolute change (Goentoro et al., 2009; Shoval et al., 2010; Kamino
et al., 2017). FCD systems have identical dynamic responses to signals with the same fold change, and the response shows a transient
increase followed by a perfect adaptation. The FCD property applies to a range of input signals and breaks down when signals are
too weak or too strong. Previous models simulated fold-change responses for the adaptive responses at the signaling steps of Ras
signaling (Takeda et al., 2012), PIP3 production, and cAMP production (Kamino et al., 2017). In our study, we included mechanisms
regulating dissociation of heterotrimeric G-proteins, and our simulations showed that cAMP-induced G-protein dissociation/activation
displays persistent and incremental increases, unlike the adaptive
responses of Ras activation, PIP3, and cAMP production. Our simulations showed that cAR1-mediated Ras signaling modeled in each
network generates transient responses followed by adaptation in
response to cAMP stimuli ranging from 10–9 to 10–4 M (Figure 4) and
produces two transient responses upon two step–wise cAMP stimulations (Figure 6, A–C), indicating that each of the networks (IFFLP,
NFBLB, or IFFLP+NFBLB) displays the characteristics of a FCD system. Two types of gradient sensing models of eukaryotic cells have
been proposed: one is spatial sensing, where a cell detects the spatial difference of stimuli between its front and back (Parent and
Devreotes, 1999); the other is temporal sensing, used in bacterial
Volume 33 March 1, 2022

chemotaxis, in which a cell senses temporal changes in stimuli
(Levine et al., 2006). Our simulations showed that our models generate directional responses to stimuli with spatial changes. Our adaptation models can generate directional responses but without spatial amplification at the signaling steps, including ligand/GPCR,
G-protein activation, Ras-GTP, active RasGEF, and active RasGAP,
between the front and back regions in response to gradients of different concentrations and/or steepness. Amplification of the directional difference at the receptor level thus likely occurs downstream
of the Ras activating signaling steps. In the future, we will investigate
how the models respond to stimuli with temporal changes and spatiotemporal changes such as waves.
The systems biology approach, comprising single-cell quantitative measurements and computational modeling, has been used to
study different fundamental cellular processes, such as cell polarity in
yeast (Howell et al., 2012), the dynamic control of signal transmission
by the Ras/Erk module (Toettcher et al., 2013), the regulation of
GPCR dynamics by its regulator (Xu et al., 2010; Venkatapurapu
et al., 2015), and calcium homeostasis (Bandara et al., 2013). This
study is another step toward more clearly comprehending the complex signaling network underlying eukaryotic chemotaxis. We are
aware of the fact that cells contain additional Ras regulatory mechanisms that feed back from the actin cytoskeletal system to upstream
signaling steps (Charest and Firtel, 2006; Charest et al., 2010; Lee
et al., 2010; Huang et al., 2013; Xu et al., 2017). For example, a Sca1/
RasGEF/PP2A protein complex is recruited to the membrane of the
leading edge of chemotaxing cells in an F-actin–dependent manner,
and there it regulates F-actin dynamics by controlling the activation
of RasC (Charest et al., 2010), and cells lacking the actin motor myosin II show a prolonged Ras activation (Lee et al., 2010). These are
components of a more complex cAR1-mediated signaling network
Modeling of GPCR-mediated chemosensing

| 13

that contains additional elements regulating Ras signaling and contributing to spatiotemporal Ras activation in a chemotaxing cell.
While our cAR1-mediated Ras signaling models are far from complete and are still missing many components involved in chemotaxis,
the modeling approach, using Simmune, will allow us and others to
readily extend the degree of molecular detail and test the validity of
the models with added assumptions through the interplay between
experimental measurements and computational simulations.

acceptor (YFP) tagged to Gβ and the donor (CFP) tagged to Gα2,
using a spectral confocal fluorescence microscope (LSM 510 META)
with a time-lapse acquisition of lambda stacks as previously described (Xu et al., 2005). The intensities of each fluorophore in the
membrane in the time lapse were measured, normalized, and expressed as a function of time in response to cAMP stimulations, using the software LSM 510 META (Xu et al., 2005).

Imaging and data processing
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Request a protocol through Bio-protocol.

Cell culture and development
D. discoideum cell lines expressing RBD-GFP (Sasaki et al., 2004),
PHCrac-GFP (Parent et al., 1998), and both Gα2CFP and YFPGβ
(Janetopoulos et al., 2001) were developed to the chemotactic
stage. Briefly, log-phase vegetative cells were harvested from shaking culture (5 × 106 cells/ml), washed twice with developmental buffer
(DB) buffer, resuspended at 2 × 107 cells/ml with shaking at 100 rpm,
and allowed to differentiate with 75 nM adenosine 3′:5′-cyclic monophosphate (cAMP) (Sigma, Steinheim, Germany) pulses at 6-min intervals for 5–7 h or longer to obtain chemotactic cells. Differentiated
cells were diluted to 1 × 107 cells/ml in DB buffer with 2.5 mM caffeine
and shaken at 200 rpm for 15 min.

Live-cell imaging
Cells were plated on a one-well or a four-well chamber, allowed to
adhere to the cover glass for 10 min, and then covered with additional DB buffer. Live cells were imaged using a Zeiss Laser Scanning
Microscope, LSM 510 META, with a 40×NA 1.3 differential interference contrast (DIC) plan-Neofluar objective. To monitor cAMP and
RBD-GFP, cells were excited with two laser lines, 488 nm for GFP
and 543 nm for Alexa 594, a water-soluble fluorescence dye mixed
with cAMP. Images were simultaneously recorded in three channels:
channel one, fluorescent emissions from 505 to 530 nm for GFP
(green); channel two, emissions from 580 to 650 nm for Alexa 594
(red); and channel three, DIC.

Generation and measurement of applied cAMP stimulations
Spatiotemporal changes in Alexa 594 and cells expressing RBD-GFP
were directly imaged using a confocal microscope. Fluorescence intensities of Alexa 594 and GFP were simultaneously recorded in two
different channels. To apply the uniform stimulation in Figure 1 or
the two-step cAMP stimulation in Figure 3, 100 μl of a mixture of
cAMP and Alexa 594 (Molecular Probes) was added to the top of
cells placed in a four-well chamber (Xu et al., 2005). To suddenly
expose a cell to two identical cAMP stimulations in Figure 2 or to a
stable gradient in Figure 4, a micropipette releasing a mixture of
cAMP and Alexa 594 linked to a Femtojet was set at least 1000 μm
away from cells and then was quickly positioned close to the cells.
To withdraw the cAMP stimulation, the micropipette was quickly
moved away from the cells. During the experiments, we changed
only the distance between the micropipette and the cells to stimulate the cells with two cAMP stimulations or a stable gradient. After
live-cell experiments, cAMP stimulations around the cells were analyzed during data analyses; stimulations with abnormal spatiotemporal changes in cAMP around a cell were not used in this study.

FRET measurement to monitor cAMP-induced dissociation
of G-proteins
To monitor G-protein dissociation (activation) upon cAMP stimulation, we measured the intensity changes of a FRET pair, with the
14 | X. Xu et al.

Images were processed by LSM 510 META software and converted
to TIFF files by Adobe Photoshop software. All frames of any given
series were processed identically. Selected frames of the series
were assembled as montages. Quantification of fluorescence intensities of Alexa 594, GFP, CFP, or YFP in the regions of interest
(ROI) was performed using LSM 510 META software and was further processed with Microsoft Excel as previously described (Xu
et al., 2005).

Model constructions and computer simulations using
Simmune
The Simmune software package is a visual interface for creating
signaling networks and running simulations (Angermann et al.,
2012). The URL of the online official release of Simmune is https://
bioinformatics.niaid.nih.gov/simmune/. Simmune consists of three
components: 1) the Simmune Modeler, which is used to generate
a signaling network by defining molecules, their states, and binding sites for the specification of molecular interactions or enzymatic transformations (Zhang et al., 2013); 2) the Simmune Cell
Designer, which is used to generate a 3D digital cell by defining
cellular morphologies (Angermann et al., 2012); and 3) the Simmune Simulator, which is used to run simulations in response to
spatiotemporal changes of extracellular stimuli. Simulated results
can be viewed as a total number of changes of molecules (and
molecular complexes) in the signaling network in the modeled cell
in space and time.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Martin Meier-Schellersheim for developing Simmune software and making it available to the public (https://bioinformatics
.niaid.nih.gov/simmune/). This study was supported by National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, intramural funds.

REFERENCES

Angermann BR, Klauschen F, Garcia AD, Prustel T, Zhang F, Germain RN,
Meier-Schellersheim M (2012). Computational modeling of cellular signaling processes embedded into dynamic spatial contexts. Nat Methods
9, 283–289.
Bandara S, Malmersjo S, Meyer T (2013). Regulators of calcium homeostasis
identified by inference of kinetic model parameters from live single cells
perturbed by siRNA. Sci Signal 6, ra56.
Bloomfield G, Traynor D, Sander SP, Veltman DM, Pachebat JA, Kay RR
(2015). Neurofibromin controls macropinocytosis and phagocytosis in
Dictyostelium. eLife 4, e04940.
Bravo-Cordero JJ, Hodgson L, Condeelis J (2012). Directed cell invasion
and migration during metastasis. Curr Opin Cell Biol 24, 277–283.
Charest PG, Firtel RA (2006). Feedback signaling controls leading-edge
formation during chemotaxis. Curr Opin Genet Dev 16, 339–347.
Charest PG, Shen Z, Lakoduk A, Sasaki AT, Briggs SP, Firtel RA (2010). A Ras
signaling complex controls the RasC-TORC2 pathway and directed cell
migration. Dev Cell 18, 737–749.
Cheng Y, Othmer H (2016). A model for direction sensing in Dictyostelium discoideum: Ras activity and symmetry breaking driven by a
Gbetagamma-mediated, Galpha2-Ric8–dependent signal transduction
network. PLoS Comput Biol 12, e1004900.
Molecular Biology of the Cell

Chou RC, Kim ND, Sadik CD, Seung E, Lan Y, Byrne MH, Haribabu B,
Iwakura Y, Luster AD (2010). Lipid-cytokine-chemokine cascade drives
neutrophil recruitment in a murine model of inflammatory arthritis.
Immunity 33, 266–278.
Chung CY, Funamoto S, Firtel RA (2001). Signaling pathways controlling cell
polarity and chemotaxis. Trends Biochem Sci 26, 557–566.
Devreotes P, Janetopoulos C (2003). Eukaryotic chemotaxis: distinctions between directional sensing and polarization. J Biol Chem 278, 20445–20448.
Devreotes PN, Steck TL (1979). Cyclic 3',5' AMP relay in Dictyostelium
discoideum. II. Requirements for the initiation and termination of the
response. J Cell Biol 80, 300–309.
Goentoro L, Shoval O, Kirschner MW, Alon U (2009). The incoherent feedforward loop can provide fold-change detection in gene regulation. Mol
Cell 36, 894–899.
Hoeller O, Gong D, Weiner OD (2014). How to understand and outwit
adaptation. Dev Cell 28, 607–616.
Howell AS, Jin M, Wu CF, Zyla TR, Elston TC, Lew DJ (2012). Negative feedback enhances robustness in the yeast polarity establishment circuit.
Cell 149, 322–333.
Huang CH, Tang M, Shi C, Iglesias PA, Devreotes PN (2013). An excitable
signal integrator couples to an idling cytoskeletal oscillator to drive cell
migration. Nat Cell Biol 15, 1307–1316.
Iglesias PA, Devreotes PN (2012). Biased excitable networks: how cells
direct motion in response to gradients. Curr Opin Cell Biol 24, 245–253.
Iijima M, Huang YE, Devreotes P (2002). Temporal and spatial regulation of
chemotaxis. Dev Cell 3, 469–478.
Insall RH, Borleis J, Devreotes PN (1996). The aimless RasGEF is required for
processing of chemotactic signals through G-protein-coupled receptors
in Dictyostelium. Curr Biol 6, 719–729.
Janetopoulos C, Jin T, Devreotes P (2001). Receptor-mediated activation of
heterotrimeric G-proteins in living cells. Science 291, 2408–2411.
Jin T (2013). Gradient sensing during chemotaxis. Curr Opin Cell Biol 25,
532–537.
Jin T, Xu X, Hereld D (2008). Chemotaxis, chemokine receptors and human
disease. Cytokine 44, 1–8.
Kae H, Kortholt A, Rehmann H, Insall RH, Van Haastert PJ, Spiegelman GB,
Weeks G (2007). Cyclic AMP signalling in Dictyostelium: G-proteins
activate separate Ras pathways using specific RasGEFs. EMBO Rep 8,
477–482.
Kae H, Lim CJ, Spiegelman GB, Weeks G (2004). Chemoattractant-induced
Ras activation during Dictyostelium aggregation. EMBO Rep 5, 602–606.
Kamino K, Kondo Y, Nakajima A, Honda-Kitahara M, Kaneko K, Sawai S
(2017). Fold-change detection and scale invariance of cell-cell signaling
in social amoeba. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114, E4149–E4157.
Kortholt A, Kataria R, Keizer-Gunnink I, Van Egmond WN, Khanna A, Van
Haastert PJ (2011). Dictyostelium chemotaxis: essential Ras activation
and accessory signalling pathways for amplification. EMBO Rep 12,
1273–1279.
Kortholt A, Keizer-Gunnink I, Kataria R, Van Haastert PJ (2013). Ras activation and symmetry breaking during Dictyostelium chemotaxis. J Cell Sci
126, 4502–4513.
Lee S, Shen Z, Robinson DN, Briggs S, Firtel RA (2010). Involvement of the
cytoskeleton in controlling leading-edge function during chemotaxis.
Mol Biol Cell 21, 1810–1824.
Levine H, Kessler DA, Rappel WJ (2006). Directional sensing in eukaryotic
chemotaxis: a balanced inactivation model. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103,
9761–9766.
Ma L, Janetopoulos C, Yang L, Devreotes PN, Iglesias PA (2004). Two
complementary, local excitation, global inhibition mechanisms acting in
parallel can explain the chemoattractant-induced regulation of PI(3,4,5)
P3 response in dictyostelium cells. Biophys J 87, 3764–3774.

Volume 33 March 1, 2022

Ma W, Trusina A, El-Samad H, Lim WA, Tang C (2009). Defining network
topologies that can achieve biochemical adaptation. Cell 138, 760–773.
Meier-Schellersheim M, Klauschen F, Angermann B (2009). Computational
modeling of signaling networks for eukaryotic chemosensing. Methods
Mol Biol 571, 507–526.
Meier-Schellersheim M, Xu X, Angermann B, Kunkel EJ, Jin T, Germain RN
(2006). Key role of local regulation in chemosensing revealed by a new
molecular interaction-based modeling method. PLoS Comput Biol 2,
e82.
Meinhardt H (1999). Orientation of chemotactic cells and growth cones:
models and mechanisms. J Cell Sci 112 (Pt 17), 2867–2874.
Nakajima A, Ishihara S, Imoto D, Sawai S (2014). Rectified directional sensing in long-range cell migration. Nat Commun 5, 5367.
Parent CA, Blacklock BJ, Froehlich WM, Murphy DB, Devreotes PN (1998).
G protein signaling events are activated at the leading edge of chemotactic cells. Cell 95, 81–91.
Parent CA, Devreotes PN (1999). A cell's sense of direction. Science 284,
765–770.
Sasaki AT, Chun C, Takeda K, Firtel RA (2004). Localized Ras signaling at the
leading edge regulates PI3K, cell polarity, and directional cell movement. J Cell Biol 167, 505–518.
Shoval O, Goentoro L, Hart Y, Mayo A, Sontag E, Alon U (2010). Foldchange detection and scalar symmetry of sensory input fields. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 107, 15995–16000.
Takeda K, Shao D, Adler M, Charest PG, Loomis WF, Levine H, Groisman
A, Rappel WJ, Firtel RA (2012). Incoherent feedforward control governs
adaptation of activated Ras in a eukaryotic chemotaxis pathway. Sci
Signal 5, ra2.
Toettcher JE, Weiner OD, Lim WA (2013). Using optogenetics to interrogate
the dynamic control of signal transmission by the Ras/Erk module. Cell
155, 1422–1434.
Ueda M, Sako Y, Tanaka T, Devreotes P, Yanagida T (2001). Single-molecule
analysis of chemotactic signaling in Dictyostelium cells. Science 294,
864–867.
Van Haastert PJ, Devreotes PN (2004). Chemotaxis: signalling the way
forward. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 5, 626–634.
Venkatapurapu SP, Kelley JB, Dixit G, Pena M, Errede B, Dohlman HG,
Elston TC (2015). Modulation of receptor dynamics by the regulator of
G protein signaling Sst2. Mol Biol Cell 26, 4124–4134.
Xu X, Meckel T, Brzostowski JA, Yan J, Meier-Schellersheim M, Jin T (2010).
Coupling mechanism of a GPCR and a heterotrimeric G protein during
chemoattractant gradient sensing in Dictyostelium. Sci Signal 3, ra71.
Xu X, Meier-Schellersheim M, Jiao X, Nelson LE, Jin T (2005). Quantitative
imaging of single live cells reveals spatiotemporal dynamics of multistep
signaling events of chemoattractant gradient sensing in Dictyostelium.
Mol Biol Cell 16, 676–688.
Xu X, Meier-Schellersheim M, Yan J, Jin T (2007). Locally controlled inhibitory mechanisms are involved in eukaryotic GPCR-mediated chemosensing. J Cell Biol 178, 141–153.
Xu X, Wen X, Veltman DM, Keizer-Gunnink I, Pots H, Kortholt A, Jin T
(2017). GPCR-controlled membrane recruitment of negative regulator
C2GAP1 locally inhibits Ras signaling for adaptation and long-range
chemotaxis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114, E10092–E10101.
Zhang F, Angermann BR, Meier-Schellersheim M (2013). The Simmune
Modeler visual interface for creating signaling networks based on bimolecular interactions. Bioinformatics 29, 1229–1230.
Zhang S, Charest PG, Firtel RA (2008). Spatiotemporal regulation of Ras
activity provides directional sensing. Curr Biol 18, 1587–1593.
Zheng L, Eckerdal J, Dimitrijevic I, Andersson T (1997). Chemotactic
peptide-induced activation of Ras in human neutrophils is associated
with inhibition of p120-GAP activity. J Biol Chem 272, 23448–23454.

Modeling of GPCR-mediated chemosensing

| 15

